[Amit Varma]: Here's a question I sometimes ask myself, how often in my life have I been actually
[Amit Varma]: alive?
[Amit Varma]: By which I mean engaged in what I am doing, living in the moment, questioning what I really
[Amit Varma]: want and not just following a groove set out for me.
[Amit Varma]: Here's the thing, through our lives, we often get on a path and follow a default.
[Amit Varma]: As young people in our society, we look at our parents and the people around us and sometimes
[Amit Varma]: become those men and women and don't think for ourselves.
[Amit Varma]: If the conventional way is to get married and have kids, we get married and have kids.
[Amit Varma]: We get the education we are supposed to get and then embark on the career we are supposed
[Amit Varma]: to have.
[Amit Varma]: In our workplace, we tick the boxes we are supposed to tick.
[Amit Varma]: In our personal lives, we play the roles we are supposed to play.
[Amit Varma]: It's as if we have been coded to live in a particular way and we are machines of flesh
[Amit Varma]: and blood following that code.
[Amit Varma]: But sometimes, we can step back for a moment and see the matrix we are stuck inside.
[Amit Varma]: We can question our choices, think about what we truly want and not just what we are supposed
[Amit Varma]: to or expected to want.
[Amit Varma]: Are those moments the only moments when we are truly free, when we are truly alive?
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral
[Unknown]: science.
[Amit Varma]: Please welcome your host, Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: My guest today is Samarth Bansal, a journalist known for his skill with data, but someone
[Amit Varma]: whose journalism goes well beyond numbers and whose thinking goes well beyond journalism.
[Amit Varma]: Samarth was into math and computing when he was young, went to IIT, decided not to follow
[Amit Varma]: the typical IIT path, became a journalist, decided not to follow the typical journalist
[Amit Varma]: path.
[Amit Varma]: And he now lives in the hills, working on the stories he wants to work on, taking breaks
[Amit Varma]: when he wants, still visiting Delhi once in a while with a different gaze than the one
[Amit Varma]: he had when he was growing up here.
[Amit Varma]: I've always found Samarth's journalism thought-provoking, and when I met him at a recent conference
[Amit Varma]: in Udaipur, I invited him on the show.
[Amit Varma]: I think we also gelled well on that first meeting.
[Amit Varma]: I found Samarth thoughtful, straightforward and curious.
[Amit Varma]: And when we finally recorded in Delhi, I was so, so impressed by the quality of his self-reflection.
[Amit Varma]: In this episode, he talks about his journaling habit and how that helped him question everything
[Amit Varma]: about his life and choices.
[Amit Varma]: He talks a lot about journalism, going back to first principles, asking questions like
[Amit Varma]: how do we define newsworthiness, how do we decide what stories to do.
[Amit Varma]: He speaks about ethics in his life, on the college campus, in the newsroom.
[Amit Varma]: He speaks about the choice he has made to live an examined life and how that involves
[Amit Varma]: walking away from the expectations of others.
[Amit Varma]: He speaks in detail about his time in IIT and in the media, so other IITians and journalists
[Amit Varma]: would find a lot to relate to.
[Amit Varma]: But the first half of our conversation is about life itself, and I found much wisdom
[Amit Varma]: there and much to think about.
[Amit Varma]: For some reason, there's an honesty and warmth and a connection in this episode that reminded
[Amit Varma]: me of the ones I recorded with Prem Panikkar and Amitabh Kumar and Chandrahar Choudhary.
[Amit Varma]: Except those guys were old friends of mine, and I was meeting Samarth here for the second
[Amit Varma]: time.
[Amit Varma]: So I'm touched by the trust he placed in me and in all of you because you're all listening
[Amit Varma]: as well.
[Amit Varma]: By the way, this episode was recorded in August, and the story we discussed in it about the
[Amit Varma]: wire was an older one.
[Amit Varma]: And now we're releasing it in October, when the wire is in the center of another storm.
[Amit Varma]: I'm reserving judgment on it till I read what Samarth has to say.
[Amit Varma]: I know he sees angles and nuances that no one else does.
[Amit Varma]: Anyway, before we begin this conversation, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: There are no commercials because but let's take a break anyway.
[Amit Varma]: Have you always wanted to be a writer, but never quite gotten down to it?
[Amit Varma]: Well, I'd love to help you.
[Amit Varma]: Since April 2020, I've taught 20 cohorts of my online course, the art of clear writing.
[Amit Varma]: An online community has now sprung up of all my past students, we have workshops, a newsletter
[Amit Varma]: to showcase the work of students and vibrant community interaction in the course itself
[Amit Varma]: through four webinars spread over four weekends, I share all I know about the craft and practice
[Amit Varma]: of clear writing.
[Amit Varma]: There are many exercises, much interaction, a lovely and lively community at the end of
[Amit Varma]: it.
[Amit Varma]: The course costs rupees 10,000 plus GST, or about $150 and is a monthly thing.
[Amit Varma]: So if you're interested, head on over to register at indiancut.com slash clear writing.
[Amit Varma]: It's indiancut.com slash clear writing.
[Amit Varma]: Being a good writer doesn't require God given talent, just the willingness to work hard
[Amit Varma]: and a clear idea of what you need to do to refine your skills.
[Amit Varma]: I can help you.
[Amit Varma]: Samarth, welcome to the scene on The Unsealed.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you Amit for having me.
[Amit Varma]: So it's just to let the listeners know I bumped into Samarth at this conference where, you
[Amit Varma]: know, everybody wore these name tags with them.
[Amit Varma]: And I looked at her name tag and straightaway, obviously, I've been following your work.
[Amit Varma]: And I thought, okay, this is kind of going to be interesting.
[Amit Varma]: And I think we also when we were talking in a session there just got into this really
[Amit Varma]: comfortable groove.
[Amit Varma]: So I was looking forward to this conversation.
[Amit Varma]: And I think we'll both enjoy it.
[Amit Varma]: So let's start by you telling me or you telling us, you know, more about yourself, like, kaan
[Amit Varma]: se aayo?
[Amit Varma]: Where did you grow up?
[Amit Varma]: What's your background?
[Guest]: Sure.
[Guest]: So I was born and brought up in Delhi, North Delhi, specifically, I like to make that distinction,
[Guest]: because there is this big, I think, cultural difference in different parts of Delhi, I
[Guest]: went to a school close to my house, English medium private school, medium sized school.
[Guest]: But right from that time, you had some sort of, I would say, inferiority complex that
[Guest]: you know, you are not one of those kids from the DPS archipelago or modern school Parakhamba.
[Guest]: So you know, and like, it was a very homogenous group in the school, everyone in the Pitampura
[Guest]: area is, you know, same kind of backgrounds.
[Guest]: So that's the kind of school I went to my family.
[Guest]: My dad is a businessman, he grew up in a village near Ludhiana, there were seven brothers and
[Guest]: one sister.
[Guest]: When he was 1884 riots happened in Punjab.
[Guest]: And so around that time, three of these brothers moved to Imphal.
[Guest]: And like my grandfather didn't really have like, in terms of finances, the very, very
[Guest]: modest beginning.
[Guest]: So my dad, and two brothers, they didn't, they like built up a business from scratch
[Guest]: in Imphal.
[Guest]: He was telling me, you know, they had these dealership of like fruity and other brands.
[Guest]: So one of the they build their credibility, and, you know, used to drive a truck all across
[Guest]: Imphal and Manipur, and, you know, made good fortune for himself there.
[Guest]: And then, after six, seven years in the early 90s, early 90s, what I think in 91, came to
[Guest]: Delhi.
[Guest]: And yeah, then, slowly, other other brothers came, and they built a business here.
[Guest]: And I think post liberalization, you know, their business grew up.
[Guest]: So I sometimes retrospectively think that somehow, you know, my father's journey is
[Guest]: in a way, you know, that moment where liberalization was giving opportunities to people.
[Guest]: So my father was one of the beneficiaries.
[Guest]: And my mom, she grew up in Delhi.
[Guest]: And my nana ji was a gazette officer.
[Guest]: And she, again, like both my dad didn't go to college, my mom did a correspondence course
[Guest]: from Delhi University.
[Guest]: And then they got married, arranged marriage setup.
[Guest]: So after that, I think, since I was a, you know, right from early childhood, I was told
[Guest]: that education is the thing that matters the most.
[Guest]: And one of the things that was that my mom felt like a victim of patriarchy, right?
[Guest]: So we have a massive family.
[Guest]: It's a I told you already, right, like seven brothers.
[Guest]: Then my grandfather had like four brothers, so it's a big family.
[Guest]: And my mom was somehow not able to fit in.
[Guest]: So for her, the success, quote unquote, success of me, and I'm the elder kid, my sister is,
[Guest]: you know, eight years younger to me, was kind of, you know, to show that kids can be on
[Guest]: their own, and they don't need the, you know, like what she felt.
[Guest]: So her, what I'm trying to articulate here is that my education and the investment that
[Guest]: my mom did, was in some way, a reflection of a rebellion, you know, about what she didn't
[Guest]: feel about, you know, things that she didn't feel right, and her response to that.
[Guest]: So I gave this context, because all through my school time, you know, this was a big push
[Guest]: that and she invested a lot I can see in retrospection.
[Guest]: So again, I told you in the beginning about that inferiority complex.
[Guest]: So I have this vivid memory where I'm sitting in front of the school, I got the admission,
[Guest]: and my mom was so angry because some other elite schools rejected me.
[Guest]: So you know, you have to prove yourself in academics, and do well, all sorts of things.
[Guest]: So that's the long context.
[Guest]: And I think, I don't know where it came from.
[Guest]: But right from the beginning, I just absolutely loved studying, you know, since a kid, you
[Guest]: know, you know, that classmate, you're a topper, you're doing other things.
[Guest]: My mom used to take me to extracurricular activities.
[Guest]: So I learned, you know, music, dance, all of those things, they were all happening simultaneously.
[Guest]: So that's how it, you know, I was growing up.
[Guest]: And yeah, always on top of the class.
[Guest]: And I think sometime, so yeah, school went like this.
[Guest]: And in retrospection, I think that somehow, like then, you know, until like fifth grade
[Guest]: or sixth grade, the way you just assessed myself, I assessed myself was primarily through
[Guest]: your exam scores, right?
[Guest]: Now that, like, I'm trying to build a career in journalism and writing, and I hear so many
[Guest]: writers about their childhoods.
[Guest]: So many of them, you know, read books, they grew up reading books.
[Guest]: Like I didn't grow up in that environment.
[Guest]: Like for me, books always meant textbooks, even again, you know, culturally, if you look
[Guest]: at North Delhi, we don't have a bookshop, like, you know, it was only after I became
[Guest]: a journalist, I learned that, okay, there is a bhaari sansin khan market, where now
[Guest]: I'm a regular.
[Guest]: So I'm saying that was the kind of environment you, I grew up in, it was just textbooks.
[Guest]: But again, my, I remember like, you know, I was so engrossed in my math classes and
[Guest]: science classes, it was never forced.
[Guest]: But yeah, there were things like my cousins and my friends would play cricket in the evening.
[Guest]: But I was told that, you know, it's important to study.
[Guest]: So I think maybe early class three, class four, I would have felt, why is this happening?
[Guest]: But I think in the larger scheme of things, I was very happy with what I was doing.
[Guest]: So that's the academic part kept going on.
[Guest]: And we can do details later.
[Guest]: But I think somehow in fifth grade to eighth grade, you know, I became like, really passionate
[Guest]: about computers.
[Guest]: There's a whole series of things that happened while I was growing up, which led to that.
[Guest]: And in seventh grade, I requested my parents that please, I want a computer at home, I
[Guest]: want a desktop.
[Guest]: And it was a big deal to ask them.
[Guest]: And one of the things I told them is that I really want to learn things and I will never
[Guest]: play a computer game.
[Guest]: Okay, so I promise you just get me a computer.
[Guest]: And they did.
[Guest]: And the funny thing is that I was not even interested in gaming, you know, so it was
[Guest]: not something that I had to give something up.
[Guest]: But that's just the way of telling them that I really want this.
[Guest]: And I think that opened the world for me.
[Guest]: I remember telling myself that this is seventh grade, that God made humans, right?
[Guest]: Like at the time, like now I'm an atheist, so going back that there's God, God created
[Guest]: humans and humans created this machine.
[Guest]: So I can now play God, you know, I can do things with it, I can create anything I want.
[Guest]: And that I clearly remember the day when I told my parents, I'm going to be a software
[Guest]: engineer.
[Guest]: This is seventh grade.
[Guest]: So it became very organically.
[Guest]: And then I did a lot of stuff on my computer back home in school, all of those things were
[Guest]: happening.
[Guest]: And in eighth grade, I learned one of my cousins was preparing for this exam called IIT JEE.
[Guest]: And then I learned that if in India, you want to study engineering, then you have to the
[Guest]: best school is Indian Institute of Technology.
[Guest]: And that was it.
[Guest]: I think in eighth grade, I realized that, you know, there is this college, I want to
[Guest]: become an engineer.
[Guest]: And I was told that the exam, you need to be good at math and science, which I was.
[Guest]: And I think there was some again, it's a whole diversion into details, but there's an exam
[Guest]: that I qualified in eighth grade, which gave me the confidence that I have a standing beyond
[Guest]: my school.
[Guest]: And then I think, grade ninth, I joined coaching.
[Guest]: And it was like, you know, it was brilliant, you know, my coaching days preparing for JEE.
[Guest]: And fortunately, I got into, got admission to IIT Kanpur, studied math and computing.
[Guest]: And yeah, so that's the, that's, that's my childhood till I went to college.
[Amit Varma]: So let's go back to, you know, the early part of the story where you mentioned your huge
[Amit Varma]: family and your mom and the patriarchy and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And what I realized looking back at my own life, for example, is that we figure out a
[Amit Varma]: lot of this stuff in retrospect, like you said, you know, in that, you know, the world
[Amit Varma]: that we are in, it is normal for us, everything there is normalized, this is how people kind
[Amit Varma]: of live their lives.
[Amit Varma]: So is it all, you know, through retrospect, when you look at your mom that you realize
[Amit Varma]: what she was going through, and this narrative is there that she was struggling against that
[Amit Varma]: and all of that, or in the moment, could you also sense her frustration and the stuff that
[Amit Varma]: was happening to her?
[Amit Varma]: And this is such a common story, right?
[Amit Varma]: This is basically India's story, that women are trapped in situations.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, they look at different ways to gain escape.
[Amit Varma]: And sometimes those are invisible ways.
[Amit Varma]: Sometimes those are just tortured interior lives, right?
[Amit Varma]: And so tell me a little bit, you know, more about your mom, firstly, and and also, you
[Amit Varma]: know, did you resent what you might sometimes have thought was overbearing, ki padhai karo,
[Amit Varma]: cricket mat khelo, all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And, and you know, how much like you mentioned before we started that you've been journaling
[Amit Varma]: for four years.
[Amit Varma]: And that's, you know, kind of useful and in a sense is dangerous, because you're kind
[Amit Varma]: of constructing yourself as it were through the through what you choose your memories
[Amit Varma]: to be.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: But at the same time, I think like in journaling, you know, I did an episode with Amitabh Kumar,
[Amit Varma]: and we spoke a lot about journaling, and it's something I recommend to everyone, because
[Amit Varma]: it's a way of not just knowing yourself, but kind of shaping yourself.
[Amit Varma]: So how much does, you know, introspection at this stage, self reflection, looking back,
[Amit Varma]: how much does it sort of shape your understanding of that world?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, and how much did you know in the moment ki yeh aisa hai and all of that?
[Guest]: So I knew in the moment.
[Guest]: So have you heard of this term, parentified kids?
[Guest]: So, the first time I heard this term, I think, actually, it was on a Tyler Cohen podcast.
[Guest]: I can't pronounce the name of this author, but one of her book, Strangers Drowning, it's
[Guest]: a book on moral philosophy, you know, seven or eight profiles, deep profiles and Larissa
[Guest]: something, I'm forgetting the name, sorry.
[Guest]: So the parentified kid, when the term I heard, it just blew my mind, because it is something
[Guest]: that, again, I try to think a lot about like, who I am I today, what can I trace back to
[Guest]: my childhood?
[Guest]: What are the roots of who I am as a person, what goes back?
[Guest]: And one of the things that hit me was empathy, that, you know, there is a, like, if I go,
[Guest]: when I was a student in college, you know, there was this sense of deep sense of right
[Guest]: and wrong, that, you know, I want to make an impact, I want to change things, I'm a
[Guest]: very different person now, but 10 years ago, that was me, where you had the sense of, you
[Guest]: know, may occur, right, or, you know, this whole Steve Jobs sense of changing the world,
[Guest]: or, you know, you see, you know, you see injustice around and you feel I have to do something
[Guest]: to help.
[Guest]: So where is that empathy coming from?
[Guest]: So one of the this idea of parentified kids is that, sorry, I didn't even describe what
[Guest]: it is, but it's something like, when you're growing up, you start, at an early age, start
[Guest]: acting as a parent to your parents.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: And I, you know, I always say, you know, that, to put it simply, there is the, it's a dysfunctional
[Guest]: family.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: And the way to, I see that with my friends is that, you know, I talk about films.
[Guest]: So there's this friend of mine and I was talking to her about Zoya Akhtar's movie, Dil Dhadak
[Guest]: Ne Do.
[Guest]: And she was like, what a stupid movie, you know, have you seen the movie?
[Amit Varma]: I haven't.
[Amit Varma]: I love her other films.
[Guest]: I think I've seen it in passing, but I didn't like it as much.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So, you know, she was like, aise thodi hota hai, this is not how families work.
[Guest]: You know, aise ladhai kare ja rahe hain.
[Guest]: And you know, Amit, when my sister, like both of us watched that movie, we were like, wow,
[Guest]: someone gets us.
[Guest]: Same with Kapoor and Sons, you know.
[Amit Varma]: Which is a lovely film.
[Guest]: Which is a lovely film.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: But what you see in all of these situations is just that, you know, deep, you know, like
[Guest]: dysfunctional families, which from the outside, you won't know what is happening.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: But anything can break at any time.
[Guest]: And you can't, you don't even know how to talk about it to someone.
[Guest]: Even the fact that I am telling it to you now.
[Guest]: It's because now I have, over the course of journaling over four years, I have now understood
[Guest]: what it is.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: Five years, six years ago, I could not even talk about it to my friends.
[Guest]: But now I could because I'm not comfortable with what that was, what that did to me.
[Guest]: So that's where I'm saying that when you are a parentified kid, when you see dysfunction
[Guest]: in family, and you're, but you are not smart enough to know that who is right, who is wrong.
[Guest]: You're just a kid, but you have to take that responsibility.
[Guest]: So you see that things are off.
[Guest]: And that channelization is that you are responsible for like my, if I do well, my mom will feel
[Guest]: happy.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So these things are happening.
[Guest]: And the culmination was, you know, I remember the day I graduated from college and it was
[Guest]: my convocation, right.
[Guest]: That day when my mom told me that I think I was 21 when you graduate, I graduated, that
[Guest]: like, and I, when I got my first check from the Hindu that, you know, like she felt she
[Guest]: finally had agency because she had started earning because after, you know, she used
[Guest]: to work at an office.
[Guest]: It was a very, it was not a fancy job, but my mom, she just loved what she did.
[Guest]: She proudly remembers that I used to do this.
[Guest]: She would get a small salary, but, you know, used to spend it on others, not on herself.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So that sense of agency, when you see has gone away, right when, and my dad is the youngest.
[Guest]: So, and again, it's a constructed story.
[Guest]: So no, I just feel terrible because I don't want to paint like a, you know, a picture
[Guest]: about other people in my family.
[Guest]: That's not my objective.
[Guest]: I'm just telling you what I felt, what I saw my mom going through.
[Amit Varma]: And there are of course, multiple facets to the story.
[Amit Varma]: It's not even a story about other people.
[Guest]: It's a story about structures and society and just processes.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: And, you know, and so all of that was happening.
[Guest]: So, you know, to answer your question, yes, a lot of it, I was feeling back when I was
[Guest]: growing up, but things started making, you know, you need to connect the dots that happened,
[Guest]: I think, over the last four or five years.
[Guest]: And I will end on this note on this question that, you know, the interesting thing about
[Guest]: journaling is that when you dump your thoughts on paper, you also, and you are just honest
[Guest]: when you are in your diary, right?
[Guest]: Like no one is going to read my diary.
[Guest]: So you're so brutally honest.
[Guest]: So the discomforting thoughts about the present, right?
[Guest]: About what happened in childhood, like that, you know, this, let me put it this way that
[Guest]: I think a lot about as an individual, what is my relationship with society?
[Guest]: What is, what do I owe to Amit Verma?
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: We are sitting next to each other.
[Guest]: You know, I believe in individual as a center of society.
[Guest]: That's my worldview and individual, individual freedom.
[Guest]: But then I'm also a member of the society, but then my parents, right?
[Guest]: That's a different sort of relationship.
[Guest]: I can't, the way I would think about Amit Verma or say my best friend, the relationship
[Guest]: with parents is different.
[Guest]: So where does that agency come in?
[Guest]: Because when I was growing up, my mom and how, you know, I remember, right?
[Guest]: You know, it's almost like she gave in everything, but is that something I asked for?
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: You know, you get this question and it's, it's a very discomforting thought because
[Guest]: today, how do you manifest that relationship when you are a child, when you're not an adult
[Guest]: and now.
[Guest]: So how do you think about your responsibility?
[Guest]: What do you owe to your parents?
[Guest]: I don't have answers, but this is the, this is the struggle.
[Guest]: And this hit me for the first time when I went to college, like I thought that, you
[Guest]: know, like for me, it was a dream, you know, to, to study at that Institute.
[Guest]: And I think my years at IIT really shaped me in so many ways, but I went away from home,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: I went to Kanpur, my parents didn't realize that that will happen.
[Guest]: They just thought it, it doesn't strike you, right?
[Guest]: That like the kid will go away.
[Guest]: So that left such a big void in my, you imagine, right?
[Guest]: I mean, you do everything for 18 years for this one person, right?
[Guest]: And my sister and I, you know, I joke with her that, I mean, I say you have a more comfortable
[Guest]: life because you know, over the years, you know, the family prospered, but the love and
[Guest]: affection I got, I feel, I mean, she would disagree that it was more because I'm the
[Guest]: elder kid.
[Guest]: So now when that creates this big void in her life, it changes things, right?
[Guest]: And that had its own series of impressions that made me discomfort, you know, made me
[Guest]: uncomfortable that, okay, what is happening?
[Guest]: And now that, you know, I decided to live by myself, I don't live at my parents' house
[Guest]: anymore.
[Guest]: So that decision, you know, what would it mean for my parents, right?
[Guest]: These are all questions that come to me and I am processing it in my journal.
[Guest]: So again, that's, sorry, it's a long winding answer to your question, but I think, yeah,
[Guest]: I realize it at that time.
[Guest]: But now that I think about it, it has become such a central thing in organizing my life
[Guest]: that I have to, I can't just ignore what happened in childhood, but then also think about what
[Guest]: is happening in the present and then just find a way to navigate it.
[Amit Varma]: And is this something you've spoken to your mom about or to your dad about, is it something
[Amit Varma]: you can talk about or is a relationship sort of still in a groove, which is difficult to
[Amit Varma]: break out of?
[Guest]: So it's tricky.
[Guest]: It's tricky because like, I don't know, because you see the tension, you know, so the sense
[Guest]: that I always have had with them is that I say, you know, whatever I do, I love you.
[Guest]: I care for you.
[Guest]: I will always be there for you.
[Guest]: But I have a life that is outside the idea of a family, right?
[Guest]: Now how do you, and they understand, you know, I mean, the choices that I have been able
[Guest]: to make, you know, I still don't have an answer to it.
[Guest]: People keep asking me all the time, how did your parents react to X?
[Guest]: You know, how did your parents react to Y?
[Guest]: And is it because of them or is it because of you?
[Guest]: I don't know.
[Guest]: So I think they and I, we know what is going on, but, and there have been times when things
[Guest]: go heated up and like we sit and we talk, but you know, it's almost like I realized
[Guest]: after a while that look, both are right.
[Guest]: You know, it's just worldviews are different.
[Guest]: You know, they came from a certain background, they have a certain expectation.
[Guest]: I grew up as a, you know, after like, after you leave home, you change.
[Guest]: And after graduating from college, when I started reading, you know, reading just, it
[Guest]: opens up the world for you.
[Guest]: And that happened like, you know, the, since the time I started identifying myself as a
[Guest]: reader, you know, the world changed for me, right?
[Guest]: So your ideas expand, you just, you're just not the same person.
[Guest]: So the trajectory of change, we went on different paths.
[Guest]: And the problem is that, you know, within this giant family, like almost all my cousins,
[Guest]: most of them, all of them are in family business, right?
[Guest]: In my neighborhood, most of the kids are at home, right?
[Guest]: That's how, that's how you're expected to be largely, you know, in the, in the zone
[Guest]: of Delhi I come from, like, that's a norm, like people joke about it, you know, ki aisa
[Guest]: hi hota hai.
[Guest]: So when you see other kids around behaving just the way she would expect me to, right?
[Guest]: But then she's also proud that he has an independent life and standing, something that she wanted,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: So I think she also has that conflict and I also have that conflict, right?
[Guest]: So it's, it's there.
[Guest]: So I don't, I mean, that conversation happens, but it's more of that, you know, to like something
[Guest]: , something heated has happened, right?
[Guest]: And you're trying to pacify it, right?
[Guest]: And on an ongoing basis, I think she has, like, of course, like both of us have moved,
[Guest]: you know?
[Guest]: So I think, I don't know.
[Guest]: I still sometimes feel like, like, I don't know the answer, honestly, Amit, that I don't
[Guest]: know.
[Guest]: And there've been other things that are too personal that I, I, you know, like, I, I don't
[Guest]: have problems to share, but you know, it just feels like that's her story.
[Guest]: And do, do I have the right to even tell it?
[Guest]: I don't know.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: They're like, there's so many, like, I've told you a lot, but I think there's this important
[Guest]: things that I could not say, because I think I respect her privacy of things that I could
[Guest]: say or I could not say.
[Guest]: So that will remain the missing bit.
[Guest]: But yeah, from my POV, I'm saying that it's, it's something that I've now accepted to live
[Guest]: with.
[Guest]: And I think my journaling is a way for me to build my own philosophy about, you know,
[Guest]: also accept uncomfortable truths.
[Guest]: And in all that, like, I think part of growing up is to realize that your parents are not
[Guest]: always right.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: They are as flawed humans as I am.
[Guest]: So and in this whole mess, you just find a way to get through things and take hard decisions.
[Guest]: You criticize yourself.
[Guest]: So yeah, I am now at a fairly comfortable space in my head.
[Guest]: I don't know what my parents think about it.
[Guest]: Does that answer your question?
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, it kind of illuminates a lot and also makes me very sad because I think and this
[Amit Varma]: is not, you know, I mean, your story about your mom sparked this off.
[Amit Varma]: But in general, this is, I think a lot of many Indian women that you don't have that
[Amit Varma]: agency as a kid, then you get married, you lose that agency.
[Amit Varma]: And then perhaps sometimes you seek a proxy.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, and that could be your kids and you seek a proxy in your kids, but eventually
[Unknown]: your kids go away.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, that's the nature of the world.
[Amit Varma]: And then what do you do?
[Amit Varma]: Do you, you know, how do you fill that particular void?
[Amit Varma]: And this is not a specific question or something, I'm just kind of thinking aloud and wondering
[Amit Varma]: because I don't think men in India sort of think about what the lives of the women in
[Amit Varma]: India are like, right, it's, it's just to live a life without agency and to take refuge
[Amit Varma]: in all of these things is like such a terrible, unspoken tragedy.
[Guest]: And I see that around in my society, right?
[Guest]: Because like, you know, when when I'm home, my mom tells me other stories about other
[Guest]: women in the society, right?
[Guest]: And it feels like everyone has the same story.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: There's some neighbors who I'm sure they're not going to listen to this podcast.
[Guest]: So I can just tell you that they are like super rich, like super rich, you know, they
[Guest]: built a business and they just have now this really fancy house in our society.
[Guest]: And what such deeply unhappy lives of women in that house, right?
[Guest]: I know details because my mom told me and you see the, you know, the way, you know,
[Guest]: in the evening when my mom and her friends, they just get together, right?
[Guest]: These are the conversations that are happening that you know, how it's just that and I think,
[Guest]: you know, Amit, and this is the thing that my sister has learned from all of this, right?
[Guest]: That how, why financial independence matters so much because at the end of the day, right?
[Guest]: Like, where do you go is the question that hits you, right?
[Guest]: Like that's the lever through which lever of control in a way that you don't have independent
[Guest]: agency, like economically, like you can't do anything.
[Guest]: And that way, again, you know, I, at one point, you know, this whole thing about, she said,
[Guest]: now that you've started earning, I have started earning that sense that, you know, you, you
[Guest]: get that feeling that now I have become independent.
[Guest]: So you know, in that way, I think that the factor of not, the factor of, you know, not
[Guest]: having an independent source of income becomes a lever of control.
[Guest]: And you know, all of that, Amit, when I started reporting and I was reporting on this data
[Guest]: on suicides and I saw that I always heard about narratives about farmer suicides, but
[Guest]: every year farmers and housewives compete among who has the highest number, right?
[Guest]: And I think it was in 2017 when I saw that statistic and I was blown away because it
[Guest]: just explains for me, at least that there could be hundreds of reasons why what is happening
[Guest]: for my limited personal vantage of what I saw growing up in, not in my home, I'm saying
[Guest]: in my neighborhood, in my society, where I grew up.
[Guest]: That was a sense I was getting that it was so, the frustration that I could see in my
[Guest]: house around me, that what it could lead to, you don't know, right?
[Guest]: And you can't even talk about it, like in a party, I would see, not a party as in like
[Guest]: a family gathering, every, every family is happy, right, everyone is happy, but you know,
[Guest]: you go on one on one and then you see that the story is different.
[Guest]: And things that happen in college, you know, when you get heart to heart with your friends,
[Guest]: you know, different, like one of the best things about IIT is that you meet people from
[Guest]: all across the country, right?
[Guest]: In an environment, you grew up in Delhi, I told you, it's a small homogeneous, you know,
[Guest]: community in school, everyone is from five kilometers and then you go to a college, kids
[Guest]: from all cast, class, states, languages, and then you go heart to heart with friends.
[Guest]: And then you see the same story, you know, and those are also the people with whom you
[Guest]: deeply connect.
[Guest]: Because you say, huh, you know, they get it, they get where we are coming from.
[Guest]: So yeah, I think it's, it's, it's just so generic.
[Guest]: And honestly, I think all of these questions have such a, now that we have spoken about
[Guest]: it, it has had a big impact on how I think about the world.
[Guest]: Because it just makes you, yeah, you know, the whole thing about what looks at the surface,
[Guest]: you know, like now it's, it's, let me put it this way, when I see, it's a very weird
[Guest]: thing to say.
[Guest]: But when I see someone who is like extremely happy, you know, like he is very happy, he
[Guest]: keeps laughing all the time, you know, I feel this, there's some, there's some problem
[Amit Varma]: here.
[Guest]: Why are you smiling so much?
[Guest]: Yeah, it's like, you know, they have a backstory, you know, and, and now more that, now that
[Guest]: I'm a journalist, you know, and I want to explore, you know, lives of people, it's like,
[Guest]: I just wonder, I don't know, it's a, I feel happy that they're happy in the moment.
[Guest]: But the question is in my mind, okay, what is their story like, you know, like, you know,
[Guest]: the way you are asking me about my story, like, and I can't just go and talk to a random
[Guest]: person and say, you know, but yeah, I think that has started happening.
[Guest]: Because again, just to diverge in college, when all of this was happening, there was
[Guest]: a moment I had to take a semester drop in my college because of something at home.
[Guest]: And that phase, I went into that direction where I thought there is no such thing as
[Guest]: happiness.
[Guest]: Either you are unhappy, you are in the shades of unhappiness, that's it, there is no such
[Guest]: thing as happiness.
[Guest]: So for now, I don't think like that.
[Guest]: But I'm saying that when all of these impressions build up, and you say, my friends even don't
[Guest]: know about what is happening behind the scenes.
[Guest]: So maybe something is happening behind the scenes with them that I don't know, right?
[Guest]: So that way, you know, this started happening that there's always a deeper life, you know,
[Guest]: I don't know what is happening.
[Guest]: So even now today, you know, if I don't like a person, right, or I'm disagreeing with them,
[Guest]: or I don't like, then you know, I just feel there's a part of me which is like, you know,
[Guest]: what I don't know is, what is his story, you know, there is, you know, he is arguing like
[Guest]: this, you know, and like, why does he or she have these views, but then a part of me tells,
[Guest]: but you know, I don't know, like, what happened to their childhood, what has made them the
[Guest]: way they are today.
[Guest]: So I think, yeah, so long story short, I'm saying that the threads that I observed in
[Guest]: my own journey now today as a journalist, somehow it impacts you because it just changes
[Guest]: the way you look at people around you, and how you think about them, and the world.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm just wondering from this, like what you said about, you know, initially, when
[Amit Varma]: you go to school, sab 5 kilometer ke radius mein hai, then you go to college, it expands
[Amit Varma]: a bit, you meet different kinds of people.
[Amit Varma]: And there you make connections, where you make connections, and you find these common
[Amit Varma]: threads, even though you could be from different places, different backgrounds.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm wondering here about being the importance and dangers of transcending the limits of
[Amit Varma]: geography, which we can more or less do in these current times, like earlier, in an earlier
[Amit Varma]: age, like when I grew up in the 80s, for example, you're sort of limited by circumstance and
[Amit Varma]: geography, you only know so many people, you know, and your circles may expand sometimes,
[Amit Varma]: and sometimes they may not like you point out many of your school friends are still
[Amit Varma]: living in the same place working in the family business.
[Amit Varma]: And the good part of the circle expanding is that you can find like your sample size
[Amit Varma]: of people with whom you could empathize with or learn something from or find that common
[Amit Varma]: thread, that sample size grows up and those connections matter.
[Amit Varma]: Because then you know, you're not alone.
[Amit Varma]: These are common experiences and those connections matter.
[Amit Varma]: The internet can do the same thing, even the act of reading can do the same thing by giving
[Amit Varma]: you access to the lives and minds of others.
[Amit Varma]: So that's one strand of it where it works.
[Amit Varma]: But another strand is that even in this hyper connected world, we can sometimes choose to
[Amit Varma]: be atomized.
[Amit Varma]: Ki chaar log baithe hain kafe mein lekin ek doosra se baat nahi kar rahe hain, phone mein
[Amit Varma]: dekh rahe hain.
[Amit Varma]: You know, to instead of embracing the concrete interactions, where you can look into someone's
[Amit Varma]: eye and have a conversation and say ki bhai kya baat hai, you're not looking good today.
[Amit Varma]: You are instead trapped in the abstract worlds of the smartphone, which make you which give
[Amit Varma]: this illusion of being connected and which give this illusion that you're gaining knowledge.
[Amit Varma]: But those are on the surface.
[Amit Varma]: So I mean, I'm just kind of thinking aloud is sparked off by what you said about, you
[Amit Varma]: know, expanding those circles, going to college meeting those people.
[Amit Varma]: And I think there are those trade offs, you know, it is possible that many of the self
[Amit Varma]: doubts you might have or regrets you might have may not have been there if you had continued
[Amit Varma]: living in that cocooned world in a pre internet time ki aap bhi chalo family business mein
[Amit Varma]: kaam bata rahe ho, math mein achche ho, accounts dekh rahe ho aap and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: But on the other hand, there is this sort of expansiveness.
[Amit Varma]: So what are sort of your thoughts on this?
[Guest]: Yeah, so I read somewhere forgetting the author, but that there's a difference between connection
[Guest]: and conversation.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: So a connection is, I'm on Instagram and you know, someone posts posts and Instagram story
[Guest]: and I send an emoji in reaction.
[Guest]: So I'm connected.
[Guest]: You know, someone I met seven years ago, we are in touch once in a while you can.
[Guest]: Conversation is where you go deep, right?
[Guest]: And what has happened with me over the last, I would say, I don't know, maybe, I don't
[Guest]: know the time frame, but I just realized the value of deep relationships, especially friendships.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: There was now, you know, I'm so proud that I have a bunch of four or five people in my
[Guest]: life, you know, and they come from different time frames, like one from like a friend of
[Guest]: mine.
[Guest]: We went, we studied together since kindergarten, couple of friends from college, someone whom
[Guest]: I met at workplace.
[Guest]: So different.
[Guest]: So they know different, we are connected to in different time, like they knew the different
[Guest]: summer at different points, but they know today, like who I am, they know the trajectory
[Guest]: and they know my deepest anxieties, they know who I am, what I do.
[Guest]: And it doesn't, it, it, it, it doesn't happen by itself.
[Guest]: You know, you, you make that effort, you know, when you say in a relationship, you have to
[Guest]: put in an effort to cultivate those deep relationships.
[Guest]: That's where you find for me, like most meaning in terms of interpersonal relationships.
[Guest]: And in general, like, you know, it's funny because as a reporter, you have to be an extrovert.
[Guest]: Like I describe my job as, you know, I'm consistently invading people's private lives, right?
[Guest]: There was a story for which I just, you know, you land up at someone's house, unannounced,
[Guest]: knock the door that I want to talk to you, right?
[Guest]: So that's, that, that's my reporting.
[Guest]: When I'm reporting, I'm that person, but in my private life, I'm very introvert, right?
[Guest]: You know, like I'm the guy in a party would ideally like to stand in the corner.
[Guest]: If I like someone, you know, then I will, okay, no, let's chat that kind of a personality,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: So when you become that person, you just want, you don't want a lot of people to have, like,
[Guest]: I'm happy to go to a cafe and actually not talk to anyone.
[Guest]: But if I want to, and if there is a connection, then, you know, I want to take it from a connection
[Guest]: to a conversation.
[Guest]: And one of my recent realizations, you know, that I figured is that when you find someone
[Guest]: like that, you know, where you, there is a connection based on values, not on anything
[Guest]: else, just ways to look at the world.
[Guest]: And I like the person, then I don't want to lose them, you know, because it's hard to
[Guest]: just find those people organically.
[Guest]: And interestingly, all of the friends that I have, then none of them are internet friends.
[Guest]: They're like my, I met them in a physical place.
[Guest]: You know, I can, they're happy, you can, they just call me up.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: I mean, I really, you know, it's just the, I don't know, I just, I'm a bit old school,
[Guest]: but you know, this whole thing about friends sending me a calendar invite for scheduling
[Guest]: a call, it is just insane.
[Guest]: I just tell them, call me, I mean, you know, if I'm working, I will just tell you I'm busy.
[Guest]: I will call you later.
[Guest]: You know, in, when I was a kid and we didn't have mobile phones, we had our landline, so
[Guest]: I put it up at 7.30, you know, and I anticipated it, right?
[Guest]: So that, or sometimes randomly you just call, so at least there is this group of people
[Guest]: who can just say, you know, like recently one of those friends, we have been talking
[Guest]: a lot and he would just say that, can we talk, I really want to, something is going on and
[Guest]: like work is work, but then you make time to talk to this person, right?
[Guest]: So I'm saying that conversation, connection, so few conversations and then ignore connections
[Guest]: is the frame that I have now.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: It's a, it's a lovely frame.
[Amit Varma]: It's given me a lot to think about, you know, when I was going through all of your work,
[Amit Varma]: the common thread that what I seem to notice in that is that you're living what I would
[Amit Varma]: call the examined life, like Socrates once said, the unexamined life is not worth living,
[Amit Varma]: right?
[Amit Varma]: So what you're doing is you're asking questions all the time, whether they are questions about
[Amit Varma]: media, whether they're questions about data, and we'll go into all of those also, or whether
[Amit Varma]: they are questions about yourself.
[Amit Varma]: And what you've sort of brought up here is the subject of intentionality that you decide
[Amit Varma]: ki mujhe yeh friendship pe kaam karna hai.
[Amit Varma]: And that's something I've been thinking about in the sense that, you know, earlier you spoke
[Amit Varma]: about that natural empathy you discovered within yourself when you were a kid.
[Amit Varma]: And we were also speaking about happiness and unhappiness, though I forget the context
[Amit Varma]: now, but there is, it seems to me that in the natural flow of things, to feel empathy
[Amit Varma]: or to feel unhappiness can sometimes be an act of self aggrandizement, where you put
[Amit Varma]: yourself in the center of the universe.
[Amit Varma]: So you are unhappy because bad things have happened to you.
[Amit Varma]: And you feel empathy for someone because you are so virtuous, and I am good, I am feeling
[Amit Varma]: empathy, main kuch karunga, right?
[Amit Varma]: And what self examination does is, firstly, it forces you to see it for what it is.
[Amit Varma]: And to say ki nahi, you know, maybe there's a if there's a practical value to the empathy,
[Amit Varma]: then I will help this other person, instead of, you know, sort of delving in that empathy,
[Amit Varma]: or, you know, if the because unhappiness and happiness, you spoke about how happiness is
[Amit Varma]: can feel so nebulous, right, at one point, you thought there is nothing called happiness.
[Amit Varma]: And I sometimes think about how you are, you can only construct happiness, you know, in
[Amit Varma]: a you'll remember moment, like I remember moments in my life as happy moments.
[Amit Varma]: Now, if you ask me happy moment kya tha, I'll say ye tha, wo tha.
[Amit Varma]: But in the moment was I truly happy, right, you know, and for me to be truly happy in
[Amit Varma]: the moment, I'm wondering if I would have had to tell myself in that moment that I am
[Amit Varma]: happy, therefore taking myself out of that moment.
[Amit Varma]: So this is sort of a kind of a conundrum to me, but what, you know, one of my guests in
[Amit Varma]: a previous episode had mentioned how she decided when she was young to be happy.
[Amit Varma]: She said when I was in school, I decided I am going to be happy, you know, and that act
[Amit Varma]: of intentionality seems important, where you also decide ki, I want good friends with whom
[Amit Varma]: I can have a conversation or a connection.
[Amit Varma]: And when I identify someone like that, I will make sure it happens, you know, that intentionality
[Amit Varma]: is there.
[Amit Varma]: So is this, you know, and I don't, I don't often see it in myself, like the way I see
[Amit Varma]: myself as having lived my life is ki bas mein through circumstances and whatever mein groove
[Amit Varma]: mein baith gaya, ussi groove pe chalta gaya, accidents hote gaye, random cheeze hote gaye,
[Amit Varma]: and I kind of land up and once in a while, I might do some self reflection and even that
[Amit Varma]: can be an act of self aggrandizement, right, ki aarey, I'm doing self reflection and whatever.
[Amit Varma]: Whereas in your case, it seems that whether by thinking about it, or whether through practices
[Amit Varma]: like journaling, where you're forcing yourself to kind of examine yourself, that you worked
[Amit Varma]: at it in a more systematic way.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about this that, you know, can self awareness also be then an act
[Amit Varma]: of intention ki mujhe yeh karna hai, so journaling being a part of that, or is it part of your
[Amit Varma]: basic nature that you're always getting meta and questioning these things?
[Guest]: Or is it something you've tried to cultivate?
[Guest]: So so I'll tell you.
[Guest]: So I think there are two phases to this one, I think it's pre actually three phases.
[Guest]: One is pre graduation, you know, school IIT.
[Guest]: And then I think from 2016 to I think 2018-19.
[Guest]: So I left my job at the Hindustan Times in January 2019, you know, just before the Republic
[Guest]: Day.
[Guest]: And then I have my third life.
[Guest]: I mean, I don't want to say third life, but a third phase, you know, sorry.
[Guest]: And where you know, I was outside, you know, it just changed.
[Guest]: I mean, you have gone from being a by yourself, right?
[Guest]: It just changes you like work is no more the center of what you are.
[Guest]: So I had a lot of time to just think.
[Guest]: And I you know, I say that I actually have a very boring life.
[Guest]: I just sit, read, write and think.
[Guest]: That's it.
[Guest]: You know, there's nothing happening apart from this.
[Guest]: So when you have so much time by yourself, you know, and it also some sometimes feels
[Guest]: narcissistic that, you know, there is so much to understand in the world, you are just sitting
[Unknown]: and analyzing yourself.
[Guest]: But, you know, but what intention, you know, so the intention thing came.
[Guest]: I don't know the roots of it.
[Guest]: I remember during school, during college, these thoughts have always been with me.
[Guest]: The structure came in the recent years, you know, where like again to talk about journaling,
[Guest]: you know, one of the best things about it.
[Guest]: Now I capture every single thought in my head on notebook.
[Guest]: You know, I'm walking and I get a thought.
[Guest]: It could be an idea.
[Guest]: It could be an observation.
[Guest]: So if I'm walking, I just quickly dump it on my note taking app on my phone.
[Guest]: I don't want because what what it does.
[Guest]: And I realized this that if things are in my head, and I don't capture it, then you
[Guest]: know, it just it keeps lingering around.
[Guest]: But if it's on paper, then it goes away like my brain is clear.
[Guest]: So there is I just want to dump my brain and have it, you know, my brain should be empty.
[Guest]: You know, and the more things start appearing on paper, I can do time travel.
[Guest]: You know, so whenever so every year on my birthday, I read all my journals, just to
[Guest]: see, okay, you know, what has changed?
[Guest]: What has stayed the same?
[Guest]: What are the questions I've been able to answer?
[Guest]: What are the questions that remain open?
[Guest]: And it just gives me this deep sense of progress.
[Guest]: And you know, it's just brilliant.
[Guest]: You know, I think I tell everyone that they should journal it's life changing.
[Guest]: So when vast intentionality because you see a chameleon, you know, if this is constant,
[Guest]: this is something I want, I want to do this.
[Guest]: So that is where, you know, this intention thing started coming in.
[Guest]: And also, parallelly, you know, this absurdity of modern life with technology, right, which
[Guest]: has taken over, you know, our, you know, platforms and smartphone, you know, you can't totally
[Guest]: escape it.
[Guest]: But you have to live with it.
[Guest]: And there, actually, even while I was reporting on platforms, you start seeing what they do
[Guest]: to you.
[Guest]: And then you realize that actually, I have to fight this, this whole attention economy
[Guest]: thing.
[Guest]: That's actually one of my I describe my work as a fight against the attention economy.
[Guest]: I don't agree with it, and I have to fight it.
[Guest]: Because the attention economy is trying to manipulate me to do things I don't want to
[Guest]: do.
[Guest]: And that sense of I mean, I don't know if there is a free will or not, I don't have
[Guest]: an answer to that question.
[Guest]: But you know, to the extent I can say that, you know, I want to do this, now, I have to
[Guest]: make it happen.
[Guest]: I think that came from journaling.
[Guest]: Like, last year, I took an eight month sabbatical.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: And I was thinking for a long time that I want a sabbatical, I want to study stats,
[Guest]: like a good math undergrad student, I was not getting the time.
[Guest]: Because as a reporter, you know, you're always thinking about story ideas.
[Guest]: It's that it's a drug, you know, reporting is a drug, you always want to report.
[Guest]: So how did I come up with it?
[Guest]: So I saw in my diary that, you know, how many times I'm writing that, you know, I used to
[Guest]: say I want a zero story moment, where there shouldn't be a story in my mind.
[Guest]: I want to eliminate everything.
[Guest]: So you start and I took a sabbatical and then two months later, COVID second wave hit, right?
[Guest]: And then my mind is like, no, my responsibility as a reporter is to go out and report, you
[Guest]: know, that sense of, but I was like, nahi, abhi, I have decided, you know, that I have
[Guest]: to study, I have to take the sabbatical.
[Guest]: So stick to it.
[Guest]: Don't let your whatever impulses, good, bad doesn't matter.
[Guest]: Stick to it.
[Guest]: So I think, and the more you practice it, you see the effect.
[Guest]: So now when I go for my regular walks and I'm like, I'm walking, so I live in the hills
[Guest]: now and I'm looking at mountains.
[Guest]: I mean, I don't know, it may sound weird, but you know, I have these, on a daily basis,
[Guest]: I have moments when there is nothing in my head, you know, it's like, you know, the sense
[Guest]: of emptiness that I'm not thinking about anything.
[Guest]: I'm just standing, looking at a hill, and one day I just started smiling, you know,
[Guest]: for reasons I don't know.
[Guest]: It is just a feeling that you have to experience that aapke dimaag mein kuch nahi hai, you
[Guest]: are standing, there's no one around, like no one knows you, you know, you're not even
[Guest]: listening to songs.
[Guest]: You're just looking at a hill and you can do this every day and you're smiling, right?
[Guest]: When I experienced that state, right, it was magical.
[Guest]: And then again, I can tell you because it's in my diary, I was like, I don't know what
[Guest]: I want.
[Guest]: I mean, I have everything, you know, there's nothing that I'm chasing, you know, so when
[Guest]: you exit that zone, it's just different because like, you don't know, like there is nothing
[Guest]: that you want, you know, things are happening, you're sorted.
[Guest]: So I tell it to a friend, they said, oh, so you are being less ambitious.
[Guest]: I was like, I don't know boss, you know, my diary is telling me ki yeh yeh karna hai aur
[Guest]: mera toh ho gaya hai.
[Guest]: So I'm sorted.
[Guest]: I'm not going to be aur mujhe kuch chahiye nahi.
[Guest]: So I think, does that answer your question about intentionality, that how, or did I go
[Amit Varma]: into...
[Amit Varma]: No, it does and it goes off into this delightful direction also because then I'm wondering
[Amit Varma]: is ki was that moment a temporary moment?
[Amit Varma]: Did you get back to wanting things when you got home, you know, and even though you're
[Amit Varma]: saying there's nothing in your head, you are absorbing yourself.
[Amit Varma]: But does that help?
[Amit Varma]: Did going off into the hills, did taking the sabbatical help in terms of coming to terms
[Amit Varma]: with not following the conventional route?
[Amit Varma]: Because what you've done, and like, you know, I left the conventional route fine, I decided
[Amit Varma]: full time job nahi karunga, yeh nahi karunga, but it came from a place of I want to do this
[Amit Varma]: instead.
[Amit Varma]: Like first, I want to write a book and then I played poker for five years, which I think
[Amit Varma]: you would be very good at and we can talk about that later.
[Amit Varma]: But so there was stuff I was doing, that phase of being at peace with oneself and feeling
[Amit Varma]: that I'm okay, I'm good with the universe.
[Unknown]: I never had that.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm jealous that you had it.
[Amit Varma]: So did that change you in a fundamental way?
[Amit Varma]: Like, you know, you know how difficult causality is to pin down.
[Amit Varma]: So is it the case that when you left HD, when you left that track, it was because you were
[Amit Varma]: transitioning into a certain phase of life?
[Amit Varma]: Or do you feel that the person you became later was shaped by the act of leaving?
[Guest]: So details possibly later, if you're interested, but I think what started happening since college,
[Guest]: and then at HD, and then I worked at India today for two months and all of that.
[Guest]: And then even my freelance, I started seeing that this is my feeling, okay, I'm not saying
[Guest]: this is how it is, but I started feeling that there are these that we are trapped in a matrix
[Guest]: in a way that there are these structures, key, you know, we are told that this is how
[Guest]: things are.
[Guest]: You know, essay karna hota hai, you go to an IIT and you said that your goal is to crack
[Guest]: that consulting job or you know, work at Facebook, right.
[Guest]: And what happened with me at IIT and then at newsrooms, is that there are moments where
[Guest]: I start, it just feels absurd to me that, you know, like I'm a first principles thinker,
[Guest]: you know, matlab jo hai wo theek hai, main first principles se sochunga, achha college
[Guest]: aaye toh kyu aaye, uska kya point hai, engineering kar rahe hain toh kyu kar rahe hain, right.
[Guest]: If I'm doing journalism, what is the point of journalism?
[Guest]: When it began, what happened, right?
[Guest]: And then you start seeing, okay, if you're in Instagram, so what are you doing, right?
[Guest]: All of those things.
[Guest]: So I ask myself that question and then I see what is happening.
[Guest]: And in most cases, I find a disconnect.
[Guest]: That first principles toh keh rahe hain, aisa hona chahiye, but I'm looking around me, that
[Guest]: is not happening.
[Guest]: So then I get into that zone where I say, I need to exit this.
[Guest]: So you know, it's absurd because I am part of that ecosystem and in that structure, but
[Guest]: I'm like also exiting it and trying to see that structure from the outside.
[Guest]: So when you see, so it's, you imagine I am like, I'm just doing these hand gestures,
[Guest]: but I'm here, you know, outside and there's this big giant circle.
[Guest]: And I'm also observing myself in that movie, what is happening.
[Guest]: And it feels like this is just a big delusion that you know what, and I, you know, I feel,
[Guest]: I don't feel good to say all of this because, you know, this is a very self-righteous way
[Guest]: of saying that, you know, everyone is trapped and I have exited.
[Guest]: That's not, I mean, I don't know if that is what I'm implying, but I'm saying that is
[Guest]: what I felt.
[Guest]: And I said, it's structures I have to get out, right?
[Guest]: So you get out of that structure.
[Guest]: It happened with me at IIT, it happened with me at newsrooms, right?
[Guest]: And I think there was a point when I started feeling, you know, this whole thing is a trap,
[Guest]: you know, everything that is happening, like, why are we doing, what are we doing?
[Guest]: And when those questions start coming in, there is a phase of deep discontent, you don't
[Guest]: know what is happening.
[Guest]: So at that time, I decided, boss, I want, I want to just think about these questions
[Guest]: and I don't want external influences on my thinking, okay?
[Guest]: And or like, that was not the only reason why I moved to the hills, but that was one
[Guest]: of the reasons.
[Guest]: Now, when you do that, right, you have seen up, ek trap se nikal rahe ho, duse trap se
[Guest]: nikal rahe ho, and you keep thinking, maybe I'm in a delusion.
[Guest]: There are like, mujhe lag raha hai that, you know, I have exited these two traps, maybe
[Guest]: there are a hundred others.
[Guest]: So you want a distance.
[Guest]: Now, what the magical thing about hills, which is not just that, you know, mountains are
[Guest]: nice, air is clean, woh toh hai.
[Guest]: The biggest thing is that in a city like Delhi, even though I don't want, there's always a
[Guest]: status game that is being played.
[Guest]: I don't know how that happens, but there is something in this air, right?
[Guest]: Like I am at a, I often work at Blue Tokai's, you know, here and there.
[Guest]: Waha pe toh I don't know anyone, but still, subconsciously, you know, there is this, you
[Guest]: know, maybe there's this girl sitting on the next table and I am reading a book and I would
[Guest]: be unconsciously, I said, you know, no one is bothered about what I am doing, you know,
[Guest]: sab apna kaam kar rahe hain, they're meeting friends, but you feel you are being observed.
[Guest]: At least I feel that, that, you know, people are watching me.
[Guest]: So I, in a way that's good, because then I'm like, you know, I have to read my book.
[Guest]: I can't, you know, be looking at Instagram in between.
[Guest]: So in that way, it's, you know, positive force, but I'm saying it's weird in that way.
[Guest]: Like, I can tell you a story which really irritated me recently.
[Guest]: So I came to Delhi, I was visiting and I go to cult, you know, chain of gyms, yeah, Cultfit.
[Guest]: And there is this, I hope this person does not listen to this podcast, but there's this
[Guest]: young guy, he's like 22 years old, okay.
[Guest]: And there was COVID, so we, he came, he used to come at the same center where I go for
[Guest]: my fitness class.
[Guest]: And he saw me, I, you know, after the cult class in Punjabi Bagh, I went to a blue tukai
[Guest]: and he saw me and he says, you know, I remember you.
[Guest]: I said, yeah, I also remember you.
[Guest]: And for some reason, he's super nerdy about headphones.
[Guest]: So he, you know, and I'm also nerdy about headphones.
[Guest]: So he took my headphones, did all of that.
[Guest]: And then he started a conversation.
[Guest]: He said, okay, so what do you do?
[Guest]: I never asked you.
[Guest]: Unfortunately, I told him I'm a journalist.
[Guest]: So he's like, oh, you're a journalist.
[Guest]: So what do you do?
[Guest]: So I said, you know, I can, I write about various things.
[Guest]: I'm a long form writer.
[Guest]: You can, if you want, you know, happy to share my samples of work.
[Guest]: So before that happened, he said, you know what, I study law.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: You should write about data privacy.
[Guest]: You should write about platforms and social media, you know, do you know what is happening
[Guest]: in parliament right now?
[Guest]: It is such an important topic.
[Guest]: And I was thinking in my head that, boss, I covered that for two years.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: I was a reporter at the Hindustan Times and as a freelancer, I've written across.
[Guest]: And now, no offense to young people, and I'm also like just 29.
[Guest]: But this 22 year old is telling me, this is what you should do.
[Guest]: So I was like, then I said, I know a few things about this.
[Guest]: This is an article I've written.
[Guest]: You tell me what you think.
[Guest]: They said, I will.
[Guest]: So he said, oh, you have written such a long article.
[Guest]: I think there is a book in you.
[Guest]: And before I could say anything, he's like, okay, Samarth, tell me, what is that one thing
[Guest]: you feel very passionate about?
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: What is that thing that troubles you?
[Guest]: That is the book.
[Guest]: I see a writer in you.
[Guest]: And Amit, I was speechless because like, I did not know what to make of it.
[Guest]: You know, I did not want, and no offense to that person.
[Guest]: He's just, he's just extrovert.
[Guest]: So he's just coming and telling me things, but I don't want this external input in my
[Guest]: brain.
[Guest]: You know, garbage in, garbage out, like, why should there be garbage in my brain?
[Unknown]: Right?
[Guest]: I went to this conference, not conference, it was a book launch.
[Guest]: And I was visiting.
[Guest]: And I went and I felt so uncomfortable because there are these, after a long while, I met
[Guest]: journalist friends and others, and everyone is curious, what are you doing?
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: How do you manage your finances?
[Guest]: Why are you doing this?
[Guest]: So you're always, in a sense, constantly explaining.
[Guest]: Now, then you feel like an idiot.
[Guest]: Is it me?
[Guest]: That, you know, like, you don't have to explain, just ignore.
[Guest]: But how do you do it when everyone around you is just asking these questions?
[Guest]: And then, because they're nice people, right, they're not evil, they're nice people.
[Guest]: And they would say something that would stick in your head.
[Guest]: In Hills, nothing happens because no one gives a damn about who I am.
[Guest]: All people who know me there, it's like, yes, a boy from the city lives here.
[Guest]: They have no idea about my background, there's zero status game.
[Guest]: And Amit, I cannot tell you.
[Guest]: It is just magical when you're not performing at any moment in the day, because no one gives
[Guest]: a damn.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: So, and once you see that, you know, you don't have to perform, like you can be an idiot
[Guest]: one time, and you can be, you know, reading your book, and no one is asking any question.
[Guest]: It's just liberating.
[Guest]: So that, I think, was one of the biggest things that I realized that started happening.
[Guest]: You come back home, and then people are commenting on my body.
[Guest]: You know, they're, yeah, it happens all the time.
[Guest]: You have lost so much weight, don't do this, don't do that.
[Guest]: So again, you know, they'll start talking about like, I think this is a very late 20s
[Guest]: thing.
[Guest]: I think every people would relate to it, you know, they start talking about marriage, that's
[Guest]: the only thing, you know, a problem that doesn't exist in your life, but people want to solve
[Guest]: it for you.
[Guest]: That kind of things, that happens in Delhi.
[Guest]: So I'm seeing this aspect of being away, and then observing, and then, you know, asking
[Guest]: all.
[Guest]: So that way, when you're outside the structure, you can actually think about those questions,
[Guest]: at least, so that helps me.
[Guest]: So it's not a temporary moment when I said that, you know, that thoughtless, I mean,
[Guest]: kuch hoga, I don't know, but that happens repeatedly.
[Guest]: When I see my diary, four years ago, usme jo sawal the, agar wo answer ho gaye hain,
[Guest]: or like, I have at least a framework to think about it, to woh ho raha hai na, that you
[Guest]: are like, you're progressing.
[Guest]: So that way, I think a mixture of all of these things is what, yeah, that's where it comes
[Guest]: that, you know, you stop wanting, because the wants I somehow feel are created by people
[Guest]: around us, you know, they influence what you want, but when you're away, like, who will
[Guest]: influence what you want?
[Amit Varma]: I'm feeling very attracted to the hills now, because they seem like a physical answer to
[Amit Varma]: the existential question of, you know, that fundamental human anxiety is the anxiety of
[Unknown]: what other people will think of you.
[Unknown]: Yeah, right.
[Amit Varma]: And it is so hard to let it go.
[Amit Varma]: And it's only I think, when I reached middle age, that at least at an intellectual level,
[Amit Varma]: I understood that, boss, no one is thinking of you.
[Amit Varma]: Everyone has a head up their own ass, kisi ko nahi par hi hai.
[Amit Varma]: And you just, you know, you just have to chill and do whatever the hell you kind of want.
[Amit Varma]: And you've spoken about wants a number of times.
[Amit Varma]: And there is a theme that I have been exploring so much on my podcast ki mujhe lag raha tha
[Amit Varma]: ki bahut cliche ho gaya hai, abhi main nahi bolunga.
[Amit Varma]: But I feel that you're the right person to talk to about this.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, this is something that so I was, you know, I had gone to Greece and Macedonia
[Amit Varma]: earlier in the year.
[Amit Varma]: And the background of that is even though I retired from poker few years ago, there's
[Amit Varma]: a form of poker which had come up called match poker, which is very different from regular
[Amit Varma]: poker looks and feels the same completely different.
[Amit Varma]: And like you, I love solving things from first principles to one of my friends got in touch
[Amit Varma]: with me and he said ki is cheez ka ek IPL type tournament ho raha hai.
[Amit Varma]: And I am I'm running he was he owned a team called Haryana Hawks.
[Amit Varma]: He said come and help me solve this because everybody's going to play it like poker.
[Amit Varma]: So solve it for me.
[Amit Varma]: So I joined the team, do baar hum jeet gaye Haryana Hawks ke saath, then I, we played
[Amit Varma]: for the Indian team and we won the Asian championship.
[Amit Varma]: Covid times mein tha online tha but I was like I was damn happy ki as and representing
[Unknown]: India Asian championship jeet gaye.
[Amit Varma]: Toh is saal kya hua ki hum world championship mein gaye jo Macedonia mein hua.
[Amit Varma]: And side by side, I also scheduled a personal vacation in Greece right after that.
[Amit Varma]: Toh Macedonia mein gaye and we were unfortunate in a sense ki three of our regular team members
[Amit Varma]: had their visas denied, we had to get new people.
[Amit Varma]: And it this particular form of the game, you kind of have to play it as a team everybody's
[Amit Varma]: got to be really clued in.
[Amit Varma]: And we got massacred like every team we had beaten at the Asian level destroyed us right.
[Amit Varma]: And I was feeling gutted at the end of it absolutely gutted.
[Amit Varma]: And then I read this great book by Luke Burgess called Wanting or Wanting mein his framework
[Amit Varma]: is that he's influenced by the works of Rene Girard, who was also an influence on Peter
[Amit Varma]: Thiel.
[Amit Varma]: And Girard had come up with this concept of mimetic desire, which is that you want something
[Amit Varma]: because somebody else wants it, you don't really intrinsically want it.
[Amit Varma]: And the frame I got from Burgess there was of thick and thin desires, right?
[Amit Varma]: So thick desires are things that you intrinsically want.
[Amit Varma]: And obviously creature comforts like food and all are not part of it.
[Amit Varma]: But thick desires is something that you deeply want and it's not influenced by anything.
[Amit Varma]: And thin desires are desires which you have because they are the done thing somebody else
[Amit Varma]: have them like Mercedes or if you're a young person, you might say I want to get married
[Amit Varma]: and have kids, but you're not really questioning that.
[Amit Varma]: Or if you're in IIT and you're stuck in that game, you're thinking, I want to go to America
[Amit Varma]: and become a software engineer.
[Amit Varma]: All those kind of different games are thin desires, which you've spoken about so much.
[Amit Varma]: And that made me reflect on why I was so gutted.
[Amit Varma]: And I realized that I was gutted because of a thin desire, right?
[Amit Varma]: The thin desire was that I want that glory that I have won the World Championships with
[Amit Varma]: Team India.
[Amit Varma]: I will tweet, 2000 people will retweet, which when we won the Asian Championship was kind
[Amit Varma]: of what happened.
[Amit Varma]: And it was an intense desire.
[Amit Varma]: I wanted how many people get this, right?
[Amit Varma]: And but it was a thin desire.
[Amit Varma]: It was, you know, premised on that old anxiety of getting the approval of others.
[Amit Varma]: And I realized that my thick desire was what my thick desire was to figure it out, to figure
[Amit Varma]: out the game, to go back to first principles.
[Amit Varma]: My thick desire was to understand something.
[Amit Varma]: And I understood why we lost.
[Amit Varma]: I understood why we lost.
[Amit Varma]: I understood why the winning team won.
[Amit Varma]: I could look at everyone's strategy and figure out what happened.
[Amit Varma]: That was understanding.
[Amit Varma]: But the thing is, the thin desire was intense.
[Amit Varma]: And the thick desire was very, you know, unseen and subterranean and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And this then made me introspect beyond that, that life me jo wants hai, woh kyu hai?
[Amit Varma]: Like I discussed the same thing with Nilanjan Aroy and we were speaking about the desire
[Amit Varma]: to be a writer.
[Amit Varma]: And you can have thick and thin desires simultaneously coexisting.
[Amit Varma]: Your thin desire is to be known as a writer, woh branding ho jati hai, main yeh prize jeetunga,
[Amit Varma]: book launch mein jaunga, jacket pehnunga, panel mein gyaan doonga, all that shit.
[Amit Varma]: And that seems to me to be thin, while the thick desire is I want to tell a story.
[Amit Varma]: I want to sit down and I want to tell a story, or I want to uncover some part of the unseen
[Amit Varma]: world or whatever it is.
[Amit Varma]: And I've realized that if you chase thin desires, you cannot be happy.
[Amit Varma]: That happiness really lies outside of that of giving them up.
[Amit Varma]: Whether or not you find a thick desire, you have to let the thin desires go.
[Amit Varma]: Because then you're chasing somebody else's dream, really, or you're chasing something
[Amit Varma]: that is superficial.
[Amit Varma]: So since you've been speaking so much about desires and wanting and you've clearly figured
[Amit Varma]: this out and escaped a lot of these thin desires that one might have in either IIT or in journalism
[Amit Varma]: and so on, you know, what are your thoughts?
[Amit Varma]: Can you kind of go further along this path for me?
[Guest]: Sure.
[Guest]: So just to be clear, I'm not a saint, so it's not a complete escape.
[Guest]: I think it's a spectrum on this, if we take thin and thick on two ends.
[Guest]: And I just feel based on this framework, I'm closer to the thick spectrum.
[Guest]: Okay, still, you know, I write a story like, you know, I started a newsletter earlier this
[Guest]: year, and I am so happy with, you know, that whole process of what I did there.
[Guest]: But you know, every time before I'm pressing that send button, you know, the process of
[Guest]: writing that story and reporting is just absolutely thrilling.
[Guest]: Like one of the reasons I started my newsletter was that I want to do original reporting.
[Guest]: And I don't want anyone's permission of what is a story.
[Guest]: There are stories that I want to tell, right, and I don't want anyone's permission.
[Guest]: So it's it came like every idea came from ye mujhe batana hai, there's a style of writing
[Guest]: I want to try in my own journey as becoming the writer that I want to become.
[Guest]: So baha se, but the moment I'm pressing the send button, I know, okay, this is, you know,
[Guest]: it's like, you know, like, what will these subscribers think?
[Guest]: Will it work for them?
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: What if I fucked up?
[Guest]: What if?
[Guest]: You know, all sorts of questions come so that the moment I press the send button, you know,
[Guest]: I just sometimes feel chaubis ghante ke lena I should just disappear because that sense
[Guest]: remains that okay, maine apna kaam kar diya because this I wanted to do, but I can't isolate
[Guest]: myself from the feedback to the work actually, you know, so that part remains.
[Guest]: And once I started thinking that a cognitive dissonance hits you, because you create an
[Guest]: impression that, you know, I am doing this because I want to do this, right?
[Guest]: And then once you start getting these thoughts, that no, I'm also thinking, what will the
[Guest]: other person think about my writing?
[Guest]: So wahan pe aage na aapka about that I am being dictated by the world.
[Guest]: So and this, I observed Amit more closely.
[Guest]: So my Instagram activity has now increased, okay, not increased, it's not that I'm all
[Guest]: the time on Instagram, but if someone does the stats, the time I spent has gone up and
[Guest]: I enjoy it.
[Guest]: Instagram, I think I really love the platform compared to others, and there's a way I use
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: But wahan pe I felt this, that there were moments when I perform on Instagram about
[Guest]: and it just performed like just to be more clear, that unconsciously or consciously,
[Guest]: I don't know, but like if I'm posting a meaningless meme on reposting on my Instagram story, right?
[Guest]: I don't know why I'm doing it, okay?
[Guest]: I post pictures, I go for this hike, love it, and I just post it.
[Guest]: So then I started thinking, am I doing this, like, why am I posting this?
[Guest]: Do I want to show people that, you know, okay, I have this beautiful zen of a life, right?
[Guest]: So then usmein main ek pattern dekha that there are two things happening, one which
[Guest]: is pure self-expression, right, I recently watched Dead Poets Society, okay, just loved
[Amit Varma]: the movie.
[Amit Varma]: Favourite film of my childhood, woh jab last scene aati hai na abhi bhi, main roh padta
[Guest]: ho.
[Guest]: I know, right?
[Guest]: So it just, and that was the moment there was a, in my own, something recently happened
[Guest]: where I just told myself that, you know, I want to become a writer, you know, I want
[Guest]: to do this, this, this, and ussi time pe main movie dekhi, so it was so, so I, uswaqt I
[Guest]: just took a screenshot of, you know, one of the scenes and I just posted it on Instagram,
[Guest]: not for anyone.
[Guest]: That was for me to tell, you know, to timestamp that aaj is din main yeh soch raha tha and
[Guest]: I didn't care about who likes it, who doesn't like it, but there are other times when it's
[Guest]: not always self-expression, right?
[Guest]: So I'm saying that it's a mix and it's a cognitive dissonance because you want to be
[Guest]: this person, but that happens.
[Guest]: So I think I don't know anyone or if you can completely escape it, but I think intentionality
[Guest]: and again, I give all the credit to my diary that it just tells you what are your thick
[Guest]: desires?
[Guest]: Aap kya chase kar rahe ho and kyun?
[Guest]: Because when you're honest to yourself, I think, I think Neil Postman had this quote
[Guest]: that I'm forgetting the specifics, but something like this essence was, you know, there are
[Guest]: a lot of bullshitters in the world, but we like to ourselves, we are the biggest bullshitters
[Guest]: to ourselves about the stories we tell, right?
[Guest]: So that way, I think I observed a lot of my, I've overanalyzed my Instagram activity.
[Guest]: So wahaan se yeh sab aaya.
[Guest]: And then I remembered in my notes, I had this quote from Warren Buffet where he asks, makes
[Guest]: a distinction between an inner scorecard and an outer scorecard.
[Guest]: So he poses this question, would you be the world's greatest lover, but the world feels
[Guest]: you are the world's worst lover or the opposite?
[Guest]: What would you want?
[Amit Varma]: Beautiful.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: So that is his distinction between inner scorecard and outer scorecard.
[Guest]: What is the scorecard that works for you?
[Guest]: So when I heard that, I was like, that makes so much sense, because the outer scorecard
[Guest]: is never ending.
[Guest]: It never ends.
[Guest]: You talk about our profession, right, it's, again, I love all my journalist friends.
[Guest]: But sometimes, you know, this whole thing about awards and retweets, and all of that,
[Guest]: it is not, it's not why I do the work I do.
[Guest]: And one thing I can tell, actually, I should say this in public.
[Guest]: I think this was 2020, COVID time, yeah.
[Guest]: This editor, there's a story I wrote, and he told me that, you know, his Ramnath Goenka
[Guest]: awards are coming.
[Guest]: So it's a great story.
[Guest]: You should apply.
[Guest]: And I, I thought, and I said, I won't apply.
[Guest]: And he was like, why won't you apply?
[Guest]: I said, boss, I have thought about it.
[Guest]: I don't want to get stuck in this award business.
[Guest]: Okay, I have, there's a philosophical reason where I think that awards perpetuate inequality.
[Guest]: And you know, the myth of meritocracy that is separate.
[Guest]: But apart from that, there was this thing that I never want to be known as an award
[Guest]: winning journalist.
[Guest]: I want to be a journalist because, again, it might be stupid, but to me, you know, this
[Guest]: is an isolation.
[Guest]: If you don't apply to an award, right, so you will just feel happy about everyone winning
[Guest]: awards around you, right?
[Guest]: And that just gave me such deep sense of comfort in my head that, you know, okay, I am a journalist,
[Guest]: not because I want this award, but you know, just stay true to like why I joined this profession
[Guest]: in the first place.
[Guest]: Because to me, it just sticks to you.
[Guest]: I don't know how long it will last, you know, but I'm saying this is the zone of wants and
[Guest]: desires that every time I start seeing that there is an external influence that will affect
[Guest]: my thick desires, I try to just get rid of it.
[Guest]: Now, whether it happens or not is a different story, but that's the framing.
[Guest]: And I think that has really helped me because now, you know, when I see like, you know,
[Guest]: in journalism, one of the things I find, I don't know if it's generic, I don't want to
[Guest]: generalize, but somehow I feel that among reporters and journalists, if someone else
[Guest]: breaks a story, you know, you know, so you're like, you feel that sense of envy, you know,
[Guest]: you know, okay, he got published there.
[Guest]: He got like, I remember back in the day when I was at the Hindu, I heard this conversation
[Guest]: between a couple of colleagues, they were discussing salary of a columnist whom I really
[Guest]: like.
[Guest]: And I felt so disgusted.
[Guest]: I was like, oh, you know, this guy is making that much money.
[Guest]: Uska toh bahut sahi hai, aisa aisa ho raha hai.
[Guest]: And I feel like, what are these conversations, you know, I just, you know, I just didn't
[Guest]: like it that why are these conversations happening.
[Guest]: So the point I'm trying to make here is that, so I'm saying that when I saw that, that kind
[Guest]: of conversation was happening, when I started seeing that, you know, when someone wins an
[Guest]: award, or you know, someone breaks a story, everyone is not happy about it in a way.
[Guest]: It's like, you know, you just look at Twitter patterns of what stuff we share up, you know,
[Guest]: you retweet stuff of your friends from your organization, you know, you just promote stuff
[Guest]: that your, you people, you know, personally, they have done, I don't know, it's my observation,
[Guest]: I may be wrong.
[Guest]: But that's a sense I got when I was in Delhi, that people are always like, I have some really
[Guest]: accomplished friends.
[Guest]: And those who know that I know these people, they will come and ask me, okay, do you know
[Guest]: how much they make?
[Guest]: How are they getting these assignments?
[Guest]: Not in the sense of curiosity, but with a sense of envy.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: I don't like it, Amit.
[Guest]: I don't know, kitna common hai, but that's what I experienced.
[Guest]: So then when I thought about it, it just struck me one over a period of time, not one day,
[Guest]: that actually the work that we do as journalists, right, there is no meaning of my work in isolation.
[Guest]: This profession matters only as a collective.
[Guest]: If tomorrow I stop reporting, it doesn't matter.
[Guest]: It doesn't matter.
[Guest]: There's nothing going to happen.
[Guest]: But if 1000 people like me exit this profession, it is going to matter a lot.
[Guest]: Because in collective is where the power of reporting really comes in our profession,
[Guest]: not in as individuals.
[Guest]: So that's why the moment I started saying ki, you know, iss award race mein nahi jaana
[Guest]: hai, follower ki race mein nahi jaana hai.
[Guest]: And I remember there's this alumni who came to our campus, Ashish Gupta.
[Guest]: He's a very, Helion Ventures, like he was the early investor in Flipkart.
[Guest]: And when that exit happened, he's a very, very smart guy.
[Guest]: And he gave a talk at campus.
[Guest]: So he used this term called anti-matrix, you know.
[Guest]: So he was explaining what, he says, he had this great talk on risk in thinking about
[Guest]: life.
[Guest]: And waha pe wo matrix, anti-matrix ki baat kar rahe the.
[Guest]: Toh tab unhone samjhaya that, you know, there are some anti-matrix that you should not chase,
[Guest]: like your salary, you know, like a designation.
[Guest]: Yeh mere fourth year ki baat hai.
[Guest]: Toh this word anti-matrix just stuck in my head.
[Amit Varma]: Beautiful term.
[Guest]: So I started now mapping out in my profession in journalism, what are the anti-matrix, right?
[Guest]: And you realize and you're like, get out of it, you know, anti-matrix chahiye hi nahi.
[Guest]: And I am a human, I have those, matlab main kitna bhi abhi bolnu, right?
[Guest]: I will go back and there is a possibility that, you know, my theory about all of these
[Guest]: things is that they're always in tension.
[Guest]: You know, one part overtakes the other, woh ho raha hai, right?
[Guest]: The more I can resist the impulses I do not want, the better.
[Guest]: So that's the frame.
[Guest]: So usme if you can fundamentally eliminate, agar aapne soch liya hai, mereko toh awards
[Guest]: mein apply hi nahi karna hai, toh you're sorted.
[Guest]: Because the next time a friend tells you, you know, I won this award, you will feel
[Guest]: so happy about the person.
[Guest]: They get a fellowship, something happens.
[Guest]: And the, I don't know the tragedy, but again, the cognitive dissonance in all of this is
[Guest]: that throughout my career, I keep getting opportunities.
[Guest]: So I can never feel like that, ki mere saath kuch bura ho raha hai.
[Guest]: Because I, you know, I just feel the world is rigged to push me forward.
[Guest]: Sab kuch hoye jaa raha hai, mere saath toh sab acha hi ho raha hai.
[Guest]: So on one hand, I will say, you know, I don't want, you know, I'm not cheesing this.
[Guest]: But then things also come to me, right?
[Guest]: So this whole calculus is that ki haan, agar mene wo chhod bhi diya, right, still things
[Guest]: are happening to me.
[Guest]: Toh then you realize ki actually uska point hi nahi hai.
[Guest]: Like in 2017, I quit Twitter, okay?
[Guest]: I read this book Deep Work by Cal Newport, usme ek chapter tha Quit Social Media.
[Guest]: I don't know if any book has led me to a direct impact right after reading.
[Guest]: Maine wo pada chapter, agle din mein gaya and I deleted my Twitter, not deactivated.
[Guest]: Abhi mera deactivated hai.
[Guest]: Uswaqt I deleted ki go.
[Guest]: And I was away from Twitter for at least eight months, no presence.
[Guest]: In that duration Amit, when eight months I was not on Twitter, I was not on Facebook,
[Guest]: I got the best opportunity in my career.
[Guest]: I got selected for this fellowship at the Wall Street Journal.
[Guest]: And that day I was thinking ki I am always told that, you know, aapko apna brand banana
[Guest]: padega, aapko you have to show your work, which is not wrong.
[Guest]: I am saying in that phase, there is a fellowship I got purely out of like, I think it had very
[Guest]: little to do with me.
[Guest]: It was more about circumstances, not my effort.
[Guest]: But I got it, right?
[Guest]: When I was not on Twitter.
[Guest]: So when you see these examples that you don't have followers, your story, aapka share ho
[Guest]: raha hai, but you are not tagged, your name is coming that Samarth Bansal wrote this story.
[Guest]: So I'm not gaining followers, nothing, I'm just, but I'm looking at Twitter, right?
[Guest]: And it's not affecting.
[Guest]: Then you start saying ki haan yeh anti-metric hi hai, you know, so I'm saying you get that
[Guest]: framework and then you try to apply it and it kind of works.
[Guest]: So it's that theory, plus you see it in practice and then it just illuminates that, you know,
[Guest]: actually that guy was right, this is an anti-metric.
[Guest]: And then, you know, you, I have my own framework on how I think about career, toh that's it.
[Guest]: I think that's where, I think I've digressed quite a bit, but that's the, I think the,
[Guest]: I'm just giving you a glimpse into how I think about some of these things.
[Amit Varma]: No, I love this because I haven't thought of this frame before and I'm actually after
[Amit Varma]: the recording probably going to sit down and think about what are the anti-metrics that
[Amit Varma]: I should ignore.
[Amit Varma]: Like maine bhi awards ke liye enter ki hai waise, pehle jeeta bhi hoon, lekin looking
[Amit Varma]: back, it's not like, it's not something I would do today, but I've done it because you
[Amit Varma]: are sort of insecure.
[Amit Varma]: There are times you feel underappreciated, toh matlab uska faida hota hai.
[Amit Varma]: I remember, you know, in the 1990s, someone who was a good friend of mine then and is
[Amit Varma]: a famous novelist now, told me something when we were having dinner.
[Amit Varma]: And he said that Amit every time a friend of mine does well, a part of me dies, right?
[Amit Varma]: And I appreciate the brutal honesty in that because I think that in a sense it is true
[Amit Varma]: for all of us.
[Amit Varma]: And, and I've kind of realized that, that wo hai and especially when, you know, and
[Amit Varma]: I think it'd probably be more true for a third world country, like, you know, that old apocryphal
[Amit Varma]: thing about crabs pulling each other down.
[Amit Varma]: And and the reason the story is told about India is that we've grown up in the culture
[Amit Varma]: of scarcity, where because you are not doing well, we are playing negative sum games or
[Amit Varma]: zero sum games, you want to pull other people down.
[Amit Varma]: And hopefully, as a cultural mindset that is changing today.
[Amit Varma]: And that's sort of something to watch out for.
[Amit Varma]: Like another thing that I try to do in my own life is I try to get away from toxicity
[Amit Varma]: and negativity.
[Amit Varma]: Like maine ek dekha hai ki there are WhatsApp groups I used to be part of, where the whole
[Amit Varma]: conversation poora din would just be negative.
[Amit Varma]: They would be shitting on someone, kisi ka screenshot laga diya, and, you know, all of
[Amit Varma]: that.
[Amit Varma]: And obviously shitting on someone makes you feel good about yourself, right?
[Amit Varma]: And that was a whole damn conversation.
[Amit Varma]: This is your friend's group.
[Amit Varma]: It is a friend's group.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And, and I left many of these groups and I said, I don't want to be around toxicity,
[Unknown]: where you're just shitting on the world all the time.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm not saying be mindlessly positive and all of that, but didn't want that.
[Amit Varma]: But then, you know, the one group that I take pleasure from being part of is, you know,
[Amit Varma]: all my writing students formed this online group called the clear writing community,
[Amit Varma]: and we have our WhatsApp group.
[Amit Varma]: And there I realized that it's positivity.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, there's no negativity, there's an absence of negativity.
[Amit Varma]: And you realize that if anybody does well, everybody else will be happy for that person,
[Amit Varma]: genuinely happy.
[Amit Varma]: You know, yeh koi feeling nahi hogi peeche ki, arey yaar yeh toh yasa hai, isko kaise
[Amit Varma]: ho gaya, you know.
[Amit Varma]: And that might be, and I'm just thinking aloud, because we are not playing any one of those
[Amit Varma]: competitive games, we're not in the same game, we are not, you know, we happen to be there
[Amit Varma]: together because of a shared interest.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: But, you know, I would imagine, for example, a cooking group on Facebook would be something
[Amit Varma]: like this, where you would not have that negativity.
[Amit Varma]: Because kuch competition nahi hai, you know, you're all engaged in different games.
[Amit Varma]: And the only way that any interaction makes sense is if you can learn a nice recipe from
[Unknown]: someone or if you can say ki yaha kya karna hai, waha kya karna hai.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm just sort of thinking aloud.
[Amit Varma]: You've told me about these anti-metrics, and I think we can all figure out what our anti-metrics
[Amit Varma]: are.
[Amit Varma]: What are your metrics?
[Guest]: What are my metrics?
[Guest]: Okay, so my metrics, let's, I mean, I can tell you about now.
[Guest]: So now I am, I'll tell you, so, so, okay, where I am right now, I am, I've decided just
[Guest]: recently, actually, you know, I had this courage to write in my journal, these words, I want
[Guest]: to be a writer.
[Guest]: You know, I, you know, I think I've, my whole journey since I started my blog, you know,
[Guest]: and became a journalist, I never, you know, could use this word for myself, as like mein
[Guest]: reporter hoon, mein article likhta hoon, but mein writer nahi hoon.
[Guest]: You know, there's this whole sense of, like, I don't belong, you know, to like, there's
[Guest]: something, you know, I don't know, it's just weird, but because I love reading books and
[Guest]: writers, so like, bhai wo, that's not me, you know, so that sense, but somehow I got
[Guest]: the courage to tell myself that, you know, ab jo hoga dekhenge, ab apne aapko toh bol
[Guest]: diya maine, that, you know, I want to be a writer, ab bol diya toh karo, you know what
[Guest]: I mean, that you have declared to yourself, like, you know, when I declared to myself
[Guest]: in grade 7, that I want to be a software engineer, and you work towards it, right, ab jo hoga
[Guest]: dekhenge, so that happened recently.
[Guest]: So I was then thinking that, okay, ab bol diya hai, toh ab iska meaning kya hai, right,
[Guest]: what does it mean?
[Guest]: So then I started thinking that ismein, this whole tension between, that I observed in
[Guest]: any creative field, is that it's very hard to have a objective metric, it's, you know,
[Guest]: so I dabbled two worlds, I'm a journalist, but I'm still a software, like, I love writing
[Guest]: software, it's just that over the period of time, my love for words overtook my love for
[Guest]: writing code.
[Guest]: Okay, so that has happened.
[Guest]: But that one point I was thinking, okay, you know, there are comparisons between these
[Guest]: two things.
[Guest]: Fundamentally, both are acts of creation, you think something, yahan pe aap code se kar
[Guest]: rahe ho, wahan shabdo se kar rahe ho, right, so they are acts of creation, it's just that
[Guest]: one overtook the other.
[Guest]: In my other world, in the computer science world, you can still see some metrics, right,
[Guest]: after you have created something, right?
[Guest]: You know, it's just bits and atoms kind of thing, right, you can, chahe aapne product
[Guest]: banaya ho, toh you can see users, if it's in a business setting, you can see revenue,
[Guest]: all sorts of things.
[Guest]: In this world, I said, it's a tension because I want to be read, but that I don't want the
[Guest]: want to be read to take over the fundamental desire of creation, right?
[Guest]: So jab mein yeh sab pe, I was thinking about it, I got this brilliant frame from Ira Glass.
[Guest]: Do you know Ira Glass?
[Guest]: I've heard the name.
[Guest]: So Ira Glass is this master of radio storytelling in the US.
[Guest]: He started this podcast in the, not radio at the time, This American Life, and then
[Guest]: Serial, which I think Serial just exploded, right?
[Guest]: So I've read a lot about Ira's work and how he thinks.
[Guest]: And I saw this, his two minute clip on YouTube, and I think anyone in creative profession
[Amit Varma]: should watch it.
[Amit Varma]: I think I know the one you're talking about.
[Guest]: Taste and talent.
[Guest]: Yeah, exactly.
[Guest]: So that is the thing.
[Guest]: So I'll just describe it.
[Guest]: So Ira says that the reason why people start doing creative work is that they have some
[Guest]: idea of, you know, the taste that they have about, okay, like, for me, what is that piece
[Guest]: of writing I want to do, but my talent is not at par to deliver that taste.
[Guest]: So it's a journey that you take to bridge that gap between where your talent is and
[Guest]: where your taste is.
[Guest]: But he says the problem is that the gap is so huge, and it takes years to fill that gap
[Guest]: that a lot of people just give up because they feel they are not good enough.
[Guest]: And Ira said this, that I want to tell every creator out there that every single person
[Guest]: goes through this journey of filling that gap.
[Guest]: And the only way to fill that gap is to keep creating.
[Guest]: Put yourself on a deadline and put out stuff.
[Guest]: And honestly, Amit, you have spoken about this multiple times in your podcast.
[Guest]: And when I think about my newsletter, I took inspiration from you when you said that, you
[Guest]: know, don't overthink quality, you know, keep doing stuff, keep doing stuff.
[Guest]: But when that frame hit me, it just changed the way I think because I'm saying, ha, you
[Guest]: know, I have a taste.
[Guest]: There is this kind of piece that I want to write.
[Guest]: I can't write it today, right?
[Guest]: But someday I will.
[Guest]: And, you know, in this whole process, something brilliant happened in 2018.
[Guest]: And I have a page in my diary where I described a certain kind of piece I wanted to write.
[Guest]: And I don't want to get into details.
[Guest]: It's very personal.
[Guest]: But I wrote something this year that met that bar, you know.
[Guest]: And of course, as your own evolution of your own creative process and what you want, you
[Guest]: know, that thing keeps changing.
[Guest]: So that gave me confidence that if after 4 years, what I wrote in 2018, that I want to
[Guest]: write a piece like this.
[Guest]: And the world will not recognize this because that is, that is like, who will know what
[Guest]: I wanted to write and I have created, you know, 5 people may say it's great work, you
[Guest]: know, 10 may say it's not that great.
[Guest]: It's an ordinary piece of writing.
[Guest]: But even those appreciation of 5 cannot, you know, match with the feeling that something
[Guest]: I thought 4 years ago is today in front of me.
[Guest]: So I have, and because I'm this math nerd, and you know, the world, like the world looks
[Guest]: like a set of metrics, etc.
[Guest]: I had to work very hard on myself to get out of that zone and take comfort in abstract
[Guest]: where there is no objective metric.
[Guest]: But there are metrics and the metric is on a day-to-day basis, like, am I creating?
[Guest]: Is my writing better than what I was writing a month ago, right?
[Guest]: Is there something, you know, it's very hard to put in words, but there is something intrinsic
[Guest]: in that process.
[Guest]: You know, like, for example, you read a, I read a piece I wrote, is there a sentence
[Guest]: that I wrote, which just feels that, wow, I was able to write the sentence.
[Guest]: It just gives me joy if that sentence comes, if the sound of a paragraph, to me, sounds
[Guest]: like, oh, I actually could not write this paragraph a year ago.
[Guest]: So I have tuned my, I don't know, feelings, brain, whatever, to take comfort in this.
[Guest]: Though, of course, like, I think I would not deny that it matters that, you know, I recently
[Guest]: launched a newsletter with a friend on food and fitness, something different I'm trying
[Guest]: to do.
[Guest]: And of course, like, you know, I'm observing, like, yesterday, the first issue went out
[Guest]: and we are trying to create something unique in our heads.
[Guest]: Now, what that will be, we will know from reader feedback.
[Guest]: So I'm looking forward to how many people are replying to the email, right?
[Guest]: I just checked this morning, are people sharing it on Twitter, right?
[Guest]: Is it working?
[Guest]: I shared it on my Instagram.
[Guest]: What is the feedback?
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: And when someone just says, you know, as a writer, there is a, and writer not like I
[Guest]: don't write fiction or, you know, any abstract things.
[Guest]: I just write like informative stuff in a way I want to tell a story.
[Guest]: If someone gets the intent that, you know, this is what I was trying to do, like the
[Guest]: feeling I wanted someone to take back, ye take away tha, if this, the response comes,
[Guest]: that, you know, oh, this part of my brain clicked, this is what I felt after it, then
[Guest]: I get a deep sense of satisfaction that what I was trying to do with my words has happened.
[Guest]: You know, that it's not unclear, like I have, there's an objective with which I went into
[Guest]: a piece.
[Guest]: Either I'm editing it or I'm writing it.
[Guest]: And that was delivered.
[Guest]: Now those three people say it, but you know, if those three people don't say it, it hurts.
[Guest]: There's a practical example I wrote, my last story of my newsletter, after which I discontinued
[Guest]: was on polling, forecasting, election forecasting.
[Guest]: Amit, on that piece, that's one of the hardest stories I've worked on.
[Guest]: I spent a whole month, one full month of effort to write that piece.
[Guest]: And I got the least feedback on email on that piece because it was a nerdy piece.
[Guest]: And back end I knew it was a nerdy piece, but I really, you know, my own, in my head,
[Guest]: I try to do things to make it interesting, whatever, whatever.
[Guest]: But there was, I got very little feedback, right?
[Guest]: So I got, I got a little bit of feedback, but it was great.
[Guest]: But it was only from people who know the subject.
[Guest]: So I was like, okay, job done, I mean, I cracked it for myself, but the itch remained that,
[Guest]: you know, I just didn't want to write it for people who are interested in forecasting.
[Guest]: I wanted to do something else.
[Guest]: So now I have it in my head that I'm done for now.
[Guest]: Now I will write a piece on election forecasting after five years.
[Guest]: I know the thing, but I want to write it in a way that people who did not respond now,
[Guest]: maybe they connect with it, you know, something like that.
[Guest]: So this is, I know, I mean, that's a metric, that's like, I can't quantify it, but I feel
[Guest]: it.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: I was thinking while you were answering, I asked that question to myself, what's my metric?
[Amit Varma]: And then I realized that for the things that I want to do, my metric is just getting it
[Unknown]: done.
[Unknown]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: You know, and nothing more than that.
[Amit Varma]: I actually come at it, you know, without using the terms Ira Glass does, I talk about the
[Amit Varma]: same kind of thing in my writing course, where I talk about process and I come at it from
[Amit Varma]: a poker point of view and therefore a probabilistic point of view.
[Amit Varma]: So you'll appreciate that, which is that in poker, we know that while it's a game of skill,
[Amit Varma]: the quantum of luck is so high that you cannot focus on short-term results, right?
[Amit Varma]: You have to put in volume only over large sample sizes, does your edge manifest itself?
[Amit Varma]: So the first mantra of a good poker player always is don't be results oriented, the process
[Amit Varma]: matters.
[Amit Varma]: Process matters.
[Amit Varma]: And where is this relevant in writing?
[Amit Varma]: This is relevant because what often happens is that you will write something and you will
[Amit Varma]: feel like it is shit, right?
[Amit Varma]: And a beginning writer will use this as a reason to give up.
[Unknown]: Yes.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: And my contention always is twofold, right?
[Amit Varma]: Number one, and this I feel very, very strongly and passionately about, there are a lot of
[Amit Varma]: things in which a natural talent is needed, like if you want to be a musician, you want
[Amit Varma]: to be a batsman, you need some hand-eye coordination, all of those things are not needed in writing.
[Amit Varma]: You know, anybody can work hard and lift that level.
[Amit Varma]: And the other thing, just using different terms in glass, but pretty much the same idea
[Amit Varma]: is that when you don't like something that you have written, all it means is that your
[Amit Varma]: judgment is better than your ability.
[Amit Varma]: You have these two things, your judgment is better than your ability.
[Amit Varma]: The question to then ask is, how does my ability rise to the level of my judgment or at least
[Amit Varma]: get closer?
[Amit Varma]: Right?
[Amit Varma]: Because your judgment will just keep going up, obviously.
[Amit Varma]: And there is only one answer to that and that answer is to keep writing, to trust the process
[Amit Varma]: and therefore don't be results oriented.
[Amit Varma]: Sometimes what happens is you write something you think is shit, you're just being hard
[Amit Varma]: on yourself.
[Amit Varma]: But my point is that especially when you're learning writing or anything for that matter,
[Amit Varma]: you will suck at the beginning, always, right?
[Amit Varma]: So the important thing is to recognize that, yes, I suck.
[Unknown]: It is good that I know I suck.
[Unknown]: Now let me work at it and get somewhere.
[Amit Varma]: And in that trade-off between getting it done and getting it right, the important thing
[Amit Varma]: is to get it done.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: Absolutely.
[Amit Varma]: And the only way to get it right is to get it done again and again.
[Amit Varma]: Like it's almost like quantity having a quality of its own, you know, you'll reach there.
[Guest]: I read a short story, I don't know if it's fiction, it's a very short story on quantity
[Guest]: quality where there was this pottery class and I'm just paraphrasing, so there was this
[Guest]: divided into two groups, one was told to focus on quality, one was told on quantity.
[Guest]: And then they saw results and like the quantity group had created like 50 pots and this quality
[Guest]: group was thinking about how to make it, they theorized, you know, they were going all directions
[Guest]: and they came up with one pot.
[Guest]: And the 50th pot from the quantity group was significantly better than the quality group
[Guest]: because they were just creating, creating, creating.
[Guest]: They just created, found their mistake, created the next one.
[Guest]: And in that progression, you know, the 50th one was just better than the one that the
[Guest]: quality group created.
[Guest]: So when I read that, I was like, I had this whole anxiety in the middle, you know, I want
[Guest]: a time when I can just write one story in four months.
[Guest]: Kitna maza aayega, you know, I should have that liberty.
[Guest]: I mean, I'm not saying that I don't want it, maybe it would be great.
[Guest]: But when I started, I observed that agar main har do hafte mein if I'm publishing, you know,
[Guest]: on a day to day basis, it's like, you know, it's like being in a gym that if you're lifting
[Guest]: weight and you know, you're adding muscle, to agar aap teen mehne ke liye chhod doge,
[Guest]: then you start again, you know, I don't know if the analogy works clearly for a creative
[Guest]: process, but at least that's, that's what I saw that it's just like muscle building
[Guest]: that you keep doing it.
[Guest]: And you'll get better, there is.
[Amit Varma]: And that's where the importance of journaling also comes in.
[Amit Varma]: Because if you go to a gym, the key is regularity.
[Amit Varma]: Aisa nahi hai ki aapne annual membership le liye, aap chaar din gaye aur phir aapki body
[Unknown]: ban gayi.
[Unknown]: And you're saying, maine toh paise de diye, body kyun nahi bani?
[Amit Varma]: Right?
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: You got to build a habit and go every day and get the job done.
[Amit Varma]: And writing is exactly like that.
[Amit Varma]: And a habit of journaling is a good way of doing that.
[Amit Varma]: Because then you don't have to, you're not in a position where you don't have anything
[Amit Varma]: to write about.
[Unknown]: And you're saying ki kya likhu?
[Amit Varma]: If you're doing a daily journal, you always have something to write about, because you
[Amit Varma]: always have yourself.
[Amit Varma]: And the advice I give my writing students is ki aap target mat banao, ki din meh 1000
[Unknown]: word likhne hai, 2000 word.
[Amit Varma]: You know, the target you should set yourself is 200 words, 200 words.
[Amit Varma]: And because 200 words is something we speak in a minute, right?
[Amit Varma]: Ek minute ki baat hai.
[Amit Varma]: So even if you're, you know, going going to the airport, you have two flights to catch
[Amit Varma]: in a day, you can type 200 words on your smartphone, kuch hai hi nahi, maine toh column sholums
[Amit Varma]: bhi likhiye apne phone pe, perhaps not to good effect.
[Amit Varma]: But you can, 200 word toh smartphone pe bhi kar sakte hai.
[Amit Varma]: And the important thing is number one, if you fall off the wagon, you know, you can
[Amit Varma]: get back on easily.
[Amit Varma]: Kya hoda na?
[Amit Varma]: If people set themselves target of 1000 words a day, right, likhte hai, 3-4 din likhte hai,
[Amit Varma]: then they fall off the wagon, then they find it hard to get on.
[Amit Varma]: And then it becomes a vicious circle where they tell themselves ki yeh toh mere se nahi
[Amit Varma]: hoga.
[Amit Varma]: You know, being a writer is not in me.
[Amit Varma]: And it becomes a vicious circle where their failure to maintain a habit affects their
[Amit Varma]: self-image.
[Amit Varma]: And it's just a race to the bottom.
[Amit Varma]: And they never end up doing it.
[Amit Varma]: While 200 words is nothing.
[Amit Varma]: And obviously, you will not write only 200 words.
[Amit Varma]: If the 200 word is and, you are not going to say ki aaj ka quota khatam.
[Amit Varma]: You continue.
[Amit Varma]: And very often you'll write more.
[Amit Varma]: But the important thing is, number one, 200 words a day for a year is about 75,000 words.
[Unknown]: That's a lot of words.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, that's a lot of words, right?
[Amit Varma]: And number two, aapki writing muscle kya se kya ho jayegi?
[Amit Varma]: You know, so at the end of a year, and I've told many of my students this, and some of
[Amit Varma]: them have, you know, carried it out, I'm proud to say, and at the end of a year, you look
[Amit Varma]: back on what you wrote on day one, and you're like, you realize how powerful the force of
[Amit Varma]: habit is.
[Guest]: Can I ask you a question?
[Guest]: So you know, I have this big circle who have like no connection in the world of journalism
[Guest]: and writing.
[Guest]: That's the world I come from.
[Guest]: So they asked me for advice that, how do you get published?
[Guest]: Okay, they want to like, you know, I think so many people want to write.
[Guest]: And one of the things that irritates me is that, when they know to aap kitab likhoge
[Guest]: kya?
[Guest]: And I was like, no, boss, I don't write because I want to be a book writer.
[Guest]: I just write because of other reasons.
[Guest]: So people ask me ki hai hume na, I have this viewpoint, main koi akbaar mein chhap wana
[Guest]: hai.
[Guest]: Toh kaise karte hain?
[Guest]: Like, how do you get published in a newspaper?
[Guest]: Because aapka naam aata hain akbaar mein.
[Guest]: So then, like, I want to know what advice would you give them?
[Guest]: I'll tell you what I tell them.
[Guest]: So I try to tell them that, write as if, abhi aap likho, don't think about getting published
[Guest]: in a, you know, a Hindustan Times or The Print, kyuki ye aata hai ki, you know, news laundry
[Guest]: mein chal jayega, yahan chal jayega.
[Guest]: Toh aapko likhna chalu karna hai na, so start a blog, and in your head think, 10 people
[Guest]: will read it.
[Guest]: Thek hai?
[Guest]: 8, like, 5 baar tum khud padhoge, 3 tumhare dost padhenge, and 2 random people, medium
[Guest]: mein kisi ne dhoond liya, whatever.
[Guest]: And just start writing and putting out stuff.
[Guest]: Don't think of, ki, whether, like, don't let, if a publication is not responding, don't
[Guest]: stop writing because of that, because it works the other way around.
[Guest]: And Amit, you know what I have observed, koi karta hi nahi, they don't, if they are not
[Guest]: getting hearing back from a publication, they just stop writing.
[Guest]: And I observed similarly in, like, I really love to help anyone who wants to get started
[Guest]: with writing code, like, it's one of my deep desires to, you know, teach people writing
[Guest]: Python code.
[Guest]: Main second year se likh raha hoon, apne college mein, I love the language, you know, it's
[Guest]: just, you can do anything on the internet with that.
[Guest]: So I can't tell you the number of people who say, you know, we want to learn this language,
[Guest]: and then I write them emails, ki aap kuch mat socho, go to this source, then you do
[Guest]: this, and aapko kahin atak jao na, I am, I'll come on a call and help you, okay.
[Guest]: Don't think that programming is some, you know, this thing that you need a degree nahi
[Guest]: chahiye, it's like, agar aap Angrezi bol sakte ho, toh aap Python bhi likh sakte ho, kuch
[Guest]: bhi nahi hai usme, right.
[Guest]: It's just if-else statements, that's what's happening.
[Guest]: That step doesn't happen, like, it's just weird in the last 10 years, I've told so many
[Guest]: people about code and this starter blog, not a single person has come back.
[Guest]: So I often wonder, am I giving the wrong advice, or like, what is behind this?
[Guest]: So do you have any suggestions on, is my approach wrong?
[Guest]: Because I want to help, and you know, that they become better writers, they're able to
[Guest]: write code.
[Guest]: But step one doesn't happen, because no one comes back to me.
[Amit Varma]: So what would you suggest I do?
[Amit Varma]: Couple of things here, one, it might be their thin desire, and they don't want it badly
[Amit Varma]: enough.
[Amit Varma]: In which case, it doesn't matter what advice you give, woh hoga nahi, because it's driven
[Amit Varma]: by validation.
[Amit Varma]: But two, maybe they really want it, let's give them the benefit of the doubt, maybe
[Amit Varma]: they really want it, ho nahi raha hai.
[Amit Varma]: I don't think the problem is your advice, I think your advice is great.
[Amit Varma]: I agree with your advice, but I want to elaborate a bit on the whys of the advice.
[Amit Varma]: Like, I would give people exactly the same advice as you just gave, but I want to elaborate
[Amit Varma]: on the why.
[Amit Varma]: Ab kya tha ki 90s mein when I was starting out, obviously, as a writer, what you want
[Amit Varma]: to do is you want to, you want your byline.
[Amit Varma]: Toh then what you think in those days is ki TOI mein bhejo, Express mein bhejo, koi lega,
[Amit Varma]: bhi nahi lega, all of that.
[Amit Varma]: Today, I think there's, it's a bad idea for a number of reasons.
[Amit Varma]: And I want to elaborate why even for a young writer, it's, you know, obviously, it's easy
[Amit Varma]: for someone like people like you and me to have newsletters, because kuch toh brand hai,
[Amit Varma]: kuch toh log jaante hai.
[Amit Varma]: What is a beginner to do?
[Amit Varma]: I would say even a beginner should start a newsletter or a blog.
[Amit Varma]: And I'll explain why.
[Amit Varma]: Number one, what happens when you are sending your work out to these platforms is you're
[Amit Varma]: going through gatekeepers, those gatekeepers have specific tastes of their own specific
[Amit Varma]: biases of their own.
[Amit Varma]: They are often looking for only what is newsworthy or in the news cycle.
[Amit Varma]: And all of those are restrictions.
[Amit Varma]: They are looking for only a particular form, like 800 word mein likhna hai, that much space
[Amit Varma]: they have.
[Amit Varma]: And all of those are restrictions of form, the necessity to be part of the news cycle,
[Amit Varma]: the house style that they might have, their particular biases and tastes, all those kind
[Amit Varma]: of get in the way and you want to avoid those.
[Amit Varma]: The second thing is that if you go down that circle that I will send op-ed idea, koi achcha
[Amit Varma]: bolega, phir mein publish karunga, then the point is that you won't be writing enough.
[Unknown]: You'll be writing once in a while, right?
[Amit Varma]: You know, TOI aaj lega toh aisa nahi ki agli hafte aur ek piece aapko denge, you'll have
[Amit Varma]: enough of a network ki kahi na kahi aapka har week aa raha hai, you know, very established
[Amit Varma]: people can build that.
[Amit Varma]: But otherwise, you won't be writing enough.
[Amit Varma]: And the key to writing good as we were discussing is write a lot.
[Amit Varma]: You have to write a lot, you have to go to the writing gym, you got to work out, work
[Amit Varma]: out, work out, work out, itse wo nahi hoga.
[Amit Varma]: And also if you're writing sporadically, only when an op-ed editor says ki theek hai kuch
[Amit Varma]: likho, then you won't even be able to write a good piece kyuki aapki wo habit nahi hai,
[Amit Varma]: aapki sirf desire hai, lekin wo habit nahi hai ki aap regularly likh rahe ho.
[Amit Varma]: And this becomes an impediment.
[Amit Varma]: The third thing is that you are missing out on what I think is a unique opportunity for
[Amit Varma]: creators in the modern age of building communities of their readers.
[Amit Varma]: Pehle kya ho raha hai, aapka TOI mein piece aa raha hai, koi dekh raha hai aur bol raha
[Amit Varma]: hai ki yaar yeh Samarth Bansal tu bahut achcha likha hai, change my mind about data.
[Amit Varma]: And but they forget about you.
[Amit Varma]: That's where it is.
[Amit Varma]: You know, a month later, they look at you in the Indian Express and they'll be like,
[Amit Varma]: haan matlab naam suna suna lag raha hai, achcha piece hai.
[Amit Varma]: And then they forget about you.
[Amit Varma]: But what happens is if somebody comes across a link to your newsletter, they click, they
[Amit Varma]: read the link.
[Amit Varma]: And they're saying, yeah, this guy's a good guy.
[Amit Varma]: And they put their email.
[Amit Varma]: And everything else you write now goes to them, right?
[Amit Varma]: It goes into their email box.
[Amit Varma]: And that email database belongs to you.
[Amit Varma]: It doesn't belong to a substack or whoever the host is.
[Amit Varma]: The email database belongs to you.
[Amit Varma]: And what you have done through this is you formed a community of Samarth Bansal fans.
[Amit Varma]: And you are always in touch with them.
[Amit Varma]: Abhi toh aap newsletter likh rahe ho, parsu supposing you have some interesting project,
[Amit Varma]: you can crowdsource funds, you can write to these guys, aapne agar YouTube channel shuru
[Amit Varma]: hai, you can, you know, write to these guys and subscribe to this, you've built that community
[Amit Varma]: that network of people.
[Amit Varma]: So for that reason, if there is a young person listening to this, and they want to write,
[Amit Varma]: I will say, first of all, have a bias for action.
[Amit Varma]: Don't let yourself hold back by what will people think of you right now a nobody's thinking
[Amit Varma]: of you.
[Amit Varma]: And it'll take a lot of iteration for you to achieve excellence.
[Amit Varma]: And the important thing is you can achieve excellence, you will achieve excellence if
[Amit Varma]: you stick at it long enough.
[Amit Varma]: So my advice would be go out and write.
[Amit Varma]: And initially, aap newsletter is I would recommend it over a blog because people don't go to
[Amit Varma]: destination websites anymore, clicking on you indiancut.com kaun karta hai, to have
[Amit Varma]: a newsletter, so that every time you're hooking those people in your work goes to their mailbox,
[Amit Varma]: you're forming a community of fans, and write as regularly as you can.
[Amit Varma]: Don't overthink ki log kya sochenge, just keep writing and and experiment with form.
[Amit Varma]: Don't put yourself in a box and say ki, you know, op-ed toh maine dekha hai, 800 word
[Amit Varma]: hota hai.
[Amit Varma]: Or I think creators think in terms of boxes of the past, that kitab hai toh 100,000 words,
[Amit Varma]: article hai toh this much, and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And I think one of the things about blogging that I loved and that freed me up is that
[Amit Varma]: you can think beyond form.
[Amit Varma]: Earlier conventions of forms were because of physical restrictions, right?
[Amit Varma]: In music as well, in films, in everything, those restrictions don't exist anymore, right?
[Amit Varma]: So just embrace a world where you have the freedom, you can do anything you want.
[Amit Varma]: So in a nutshell, so in a nutshell, I would give them exactly the same advice you're giving,
[Guest]: you're giving them, but these would be my whys.
[Guest]: Yeah, that makes so much sense.
[Guest]: And now, I mean, we have spoken for a while.
[Guest]: So I'll just tell you one anxiety, like I had this dream, I'm recording in December
[Guest]: 2020.
[Guest]: I know these dates, because diary.
[Guest]: So you know, Amit, there's some publication which was commissioning me a story.
[Guest]: And I absolutely loved, you know, we discussed the idea.
[Guest]: But then, one day I had this dream, it was a it's a long story that I had to write, you
[Guest]: know, 4000-5000 word, some narrative piece.
[Guest]: And I had this dream that the editors of this publication called me, and they say, you know,
[Guest]: Samarth, we got a, we connected with the person who edited you at the Hindu Sunday magazine.
[Guest]: My first job was at the Hindu and I wrote one, you know, magazine story.
[Guest]: And that, Amit, that magazine story was almost entirely rewritten.
[Guest]: Her sentence, I mean, for good, because my writing was shit.
[Guest]: You know, I did this unfortunate thing of looking at my first drafts that I wrote seven
[Guest]: years ago.
[Guest]: And I was like, how did the Hindu hire me?
[Guest]: I mean, why did they, like, how could they do it with this, right?
[Guest]: That's the sense you get.
[Guest]: And like, you feel a bit good that progress has been made.
[Guest]: But I'm saying, that thing never went away in my head that I have a byline on it.
[Guest]: But every sentence, you know, it just, you know what I mean, it just, it's painful, you
[Guest]: know, I wrote it all, the name is mine, but the article is not mine.
[Guest]: But people are saying that you wrote it, all of that.
[Guest]: So the dream was that these editors, they got a call from, or somehow they connected
[Guest]: and they said, Samarth, we heard that you can't write magazine pieces.
[Guest]: You know, every line of yours has been edited.
[Guest]: How do we know?
[Guest]: We have seen your other work.
[Guest]: How do we do have not spoken to other people?
[Guest]: So we think you are not capable to write for us.
[Guest]: Interesting dream.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: And I don't know what happened after that.
[Guest]: And no, no, I tell you, one thing happened, then I started giving them explanations that
[Guest]: no, no, no, no, no, actually, you know, that was like 2016.
[Guest]: I was new.
[Guest]: But you know, I've worked so hard, I've done this, now you should read my other pieces.
[Guest]: I went from there to now my pieces are published, you know, with 10% editing in the best of
[Guest]: Indian newspapers.
[Guest]: So you should say no, no, no, no, something was happening.
[Guest]: So I don't know what happened after that, in that dream.
[Guest]: But the reason I was telling this is that even when you know that things are on track,
[Guest]: you know, with the whole framework I gave you, if that dream is coming, you know, there
[Guest]: is something there, right?
[Guest]: There is something.
[Guest]: I mean, I can't describe it, but you know, like I'm the only reason I mentioned this
[Guest]: is that now I feel relatively slightly bit more confident to put my work out in the public
[Guest]: because you know, when you work on the technicalities of language, all of those things, right, it's
[Guest]: not maybe the best piece of writing or whatever, you know, like a very smart, like if Amit Verma
[Guest]: reads my piece, then he will see it, you know, like I wrote a piece, then, you know, there's
[Guest]: someone who was really helping me with my editing and the piece was not edited.
[Guest]: So the next day I asked him on the phone what I had done, he said, boss, you messed up at
[Guest]: the end.
[Guest]: I said, damn, she caught it because I knew I fucked up and she because she knew my writing,
[Guest]: she could just point out that you played the game early here, I said, yes, I did, you know,
[Guest]: and it just pained me, I said, if they see it, so others will also see it, right?
[Guest]: So I'm saying that people who know, who think about the craft of writing, they can catch,
[Guest]: but still it is beyond something that's, it's okay, I don't feel embarrassed to put things
[Guest]: out in the world, you know, that's what I'm saying, you know, that's like, threshold wise,
[Guest]: it just crossed that, uske baad bhi, agar yeh sapna aa raha hai, that means that there
[Guest]: is some anxiety, kuch toh hai, so that's, I just, I'm just sharing that this was a dream
[Guest]: I got, even though I feel a bit more comfortable in putting out my work.
[Amit Varma]: Main jab college mein tha, I did my BA from Ferguson College, Pune, and my, the reason
[Amit Varma]: I chose to do a BA in English Literature is ki class nahi jaana parega, toh teen saal
[Amit Varma]: mein class hi nahi gaya, malabar ek do baar gaya honga just to check out ki kaun hai,
[Amit Varma]: kya ho raha hai, but class hi nahi gaya and I would study on the day before the exam and
[Amit Varma]: I kind of sailed through and that was my blas attitude, right?
[Amit Varma]: But for 10 years after that, I would have this recurring nightmare that I have failed
[Guest]: at final exam, and I have absolutely no idea why, because I didn't, I didn't, because
[Amit Varma]: a conscious me didn't give a damn, couldn't care less, you know, took pride in being mediocre
[Amit Varma]: as far as that anti metric of Marx was concerned, right?
[Amit Varma]: The conscious me never gave a shit, lekin wo sapna aata tha, so I don't know whether
[Amit Varma]: the sapna came because of something ingrained from parental expectation, or whatever, so
[Amit Varma]: that that's, that's kind of sort of interesting there. So, so your dreams are fascinating,
[Amit Varma]: you know, yeah, dreams are sort of dreams are so fascinating. And when what he was saying
[Amit Varma]: about, you know, sending a piece to your friend and realizing and knowing you made a mistake
[Amit Varma]: in the craft, and then she catches it and says, end mein kya kya hai. And sometimes
[Amit Varma]: and what's happened with this podcast is ki yeh genre thora naya hai, chaar ghante ki
[Amit Varma]: conversation, paanch ghante ki conversation kaun karta hai. Now, as you would expect,
[Amit Varma]: there's a lot of intentionality behind what I do. And I have figured out guidelines of
[Amit Varma]: craft for myself. And the whole thing is a moving thing, it keeps changing. And there's
[Amit Varma]: nothing like it outside, because nobody does it. It's almost like a new form. How do you
[Amit Varma]: do a five hour conversation. And I will often look back on older episodes I've done and
[Amit Varma]: I'll think of mistakes I made in terms of craft, in terms of the directions I went down
[Amit Varma]: or the way I structured it. And I know that literally nobody else will see those. I mean,
[Amit Varma]: they might have an effect on the listener, but they won't see it as a mistake of craft
[Amit Varma]: because matlab, it's, you know, there is no guideline that yeh craft hai, while writing
[Amit Varma]: in journalism have textbooks on craft and all of that. But my principle is ki, you just
[Amit Varma]: barrel on, you do episode after episode, just barrel on. So I never look back, you just
[Amit Varma]: barrel on. And that's again, in a sense, as far as at least my podcasting is concerned,
[Amit Varma]: I think I'm embodying the advice I give others that karte rao, just keep doing, you know,
[Amit Varma]: unfortunately, I haven't been able to follow that advice enough in my own writing, because
[Amit Varma]: I would like to write much more. And I've had issues with process and discipline and
[Amit Varma]: all of that. But at least in this, it has worked for me, that you keep doing it, you
[Amit Varma]: will get better over time, you will realize you've gotten better over time. In retrospect,
[Amit Varma]: you will see that I went from A to B to C or whatever. But in the moment, sometimes
[Amit Varma]: you can't and there's a danger in paralyzing yourself by being too self critical.
[Guest]: Yeah, and I remember, you know, in my coaching in my 12th class, so in the coaching center,
[Guest]: and again, I mean, you know, the when I read narratives in the press about coaching, it's
[Guest]: just like I can't relate. It's like hai bechare bachche, bachpan chheen liya, you know, that's
[Guest]: the narrative, you know, and I'm like, I don't know, I am not commenting on it as a reporter,
[Guest]: but I'm like, this is not me yaar, mera toh, we had a blast at coaching, we had a great
[Guest]: time. So anyway, that was so, our chemistry teacher, unhone ek cheez batai, I think, you
[Guest]: know, he was just trying to motivate us. He says, you know, success is boring. Like, what
[Guest]: does that mean? He says, think about Sachin Tendulkar. He said, what does this guy do?
[Guest]: This guy, every day, goes to the field, you know, takes a bat and hits the ball. Right?
[Guest]: That is all this guy does day in day out. And that's why he's Sachin. Toh hum like,
[Guest]: baat toh sahi hai, kar kya raha hai? Ball hi toh hit kar raha hai. So, he was just trying
[Guest]: to tell us that, like, you know, study, you know, focus on the process, don't think about,
[Guest]: you know, have a goal, but like, solve your problems. And don't, like, you know, because
[Guest]: everyone around us kind of telling nahi, these nerds, bachche, parte rehte hain, all of those
[Guest]: things, right? So, like, ignore, ignore, you know, just, you have a goal, you want to,
[Guest]: you know, want to get to that institute. So, just study. And like, if, if, if you think
[Guest]: it's boring, it's because boring is the norm. I mean, that's how he was trying to tell us
[Guest]: about exams. We didn't find our math, physics, chemistry problems boring. We loved it. That's
[Guest]: why wo hum kar rehte hain. So, same thing abhi bhi hota hai that, you know, aise kuch
[Guest]: pada nahi chal raha hai that, you know, what's happening idhar udhar. But it's just that,
[Guest]: if someone thinks ki outcome ikdum se nahi mil raha hai. So, I just remember that story
[Guest]: ki, you know, Sachin bhi, you know, ground pe jaake, bas, he's just hitting the ball.
[Guest]: Toh aap bhi, you know, computer pe baith ke likte rao. Whatever happens is.
[Amit Varma]: That's a lovely way to put it that Sachin is boring. And the other point I'll sometimes
[Amit Varma]: make is, I mean, that's the importance of hard work and also the importance of humility.
[Amit Varma]: Like I'll tell people that, you know, you think that Virat Kohli is an arrogant brat
[Amit Varma]: and all that jaisa uska image hai. But when it comes to his craft, I guarantee you that
[Amit Varma]: he is a humblest person around because the only way you get that good is by playing thousands
[Amit Varma]: of balls in the nets, focusing only on what you're doing wrong. Right. Focusing only like,
[Amit Varma]: why am I missing that swinging ball outside the off stump? You examine, your coaches will
[Amit Varma]: tell you, your fellow batsmen will tell you, you focus on your mistakes. So people might
[Amit Varma]: be arrogant outside of their domain where they've achieved excellence. But my belief
[Amit Varma]: is that to achieve excellence, you have to be incredibly humble in that domain, because
[Amit Varma]: nahi toh nahi hone wala hai. You know, you have to. And at the same level of the same
[Amit Varma]: time, you perhaps also need a level of, you know, self delusion helps. Like when I think
[Amit Varma]: of myself as a young person, my ability and my judgment were both bad. So I would write
[Amit Varma]: shit and I would think it's great. This is like when? India ka time? No, no, 20s, I guess.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. So I would write shit and I would think it's great. But self delusion helps, you know,
[Guest]: you fake it till you make it. I've been there. Absolutely. You know, when I was a blogger
[Guest]: in college, toh uss waqt mujhe kuchh pata nahi tha. It's just that I wanted to express.
[Guest]: Aur mera, you know, archives mere paas hain. And like, like, forget quality of ideas. Ideas
[Guest]: toh the hi nahi. They were grammatical mistakes. So once, you know, we had a college fest aur
[Guest]: hum railway station gaye we the. And this friend of mine, in I think the third semester
[Guest]: or something, he comes and tells me that, do you know what people in the English Literary
[Guest]: Society say about your blog? I was like, what do they say? He says like, that, you know,
[Guest]: it's like written like this, it's written like that. You know, that one person was telling
[Guest]: me, you know, samarth ka blog toh matlab, what is it? Toh uss waqt mujhe, I was like,
[Guest]: those arrogant people, unko kya bata, main toh likhunga, right? I didn't realize it until
[Guest]: very late that technically they were right. Matlab, it was objectively bad piece of writing
[Guest]: in sense of grammar. Everything was broken. But uss waqt main kare ja raha tha because,
[Guest]: you know, for me, the blog was just a, you know, what the name of my blog was. And you
[Guest]: will know when I say it's self-expression. Don't tell me it's random musings or something
[Guest]: that was a cliche of those days. It's, it's embarrassing. But my name of the, my blog's
[Guest]: name was Crazy Sam. Okay, with the crazy ka spelling tha, K-R-A-Z-Z-Y, because I just
[Guest]: loved Hrithik Roshan's dance in this movie game, Crazy 4. Toh you know, when I started
[Guest]: my blog after my coaching, I was like Crazy Sam. Toh at 17, you know, matlab ab 13 saal
[Guest]: ki umar mein aapko samajh aata hai, you know, email addresses, all of us have those. Toh
[Guest]: mujhe kabhi samajhi nahi aaya. And even when it hit me, till I became a journalist, I didn't
[Guest]: change the name of the blog because mujhe laga haan woh, it was some madness, jisme
[Guest]: woh blog aaya tha. And the blog will reflect that madness. So, I am not going to change
[Guest]: the name. Right? So, but over time, I saw that at least I was true to self-expression.
[Guest]: Agar maine blog ka naam bhi nahi change kara, right? I knew like what, like I knew it was
[Guest]: funny, you know. But tha ki, you know, this is for self-expression. Language can go to
[Guest]: hell. Malabh woh, pata bhi nahi tha ki language kharab ho rahi hai, right? And one day, like
[Guest]: I recently, you know, you will say, you know, kitna narcissistic banda hai. But I don't
[Guest]: have my journal from college. So, you know, what's the best archive? Facebook messages.
[Guest]: Because us waqt, I used to have these long, ab kaun hi Facebook use karta hai? And even
[Guest]: on Instagram, I don't text. Us waqt toh, you know, we're in college, aap heart to heart
[Guest]: kare ja rahe ho apne doston ke saath, right? So, I have snapshots of what I was writing
[Guest]: to my friends. Like, so it's just brilliant, like for me to time travel. So, yeah, that's
[Guest]: why I'm saying you could feel that bahut narcissistic, you know, apne waare mein sochta raha tha.
[Guest]: But whatever is the case, I enjoy doing that. I, you know, want to travel in time.
[Amit Varma]: Probably the opposite of narcissistic, because when you look at all the, like when I look
[Amit Varma]: at all the shit I wrote once upon a time, it lends itself to humility, no? Because then
[Amit Varma]: you realize ki yaar main toh samjhta tha main itna top hoon and then you look at your, that
[Unknown]: embarrassing rubbish and you're like ki theek hai yaar, abhi just chill, don't take it too
[Guest]: far. Yeah, usmein I saw that how people are very generous, because there's this post I
[Guest]: put up, which had some reference to my friend. And this friend's girlfriend, who was not
[Guest]: from our college, I swear, and we were not even Facebook friends, okay? She read my blog
[Guest]: and she sent me this long message saying that, you know, Samar, you wrote this. I, you know,
[Guest]: as a, it was something about festival that I wrote something, something. She said, you
[Guest]: know, as a girl, I relate with what you wrote, tak tak tak. But I think that, you know, you
[Guest]: could work on your language. It feels like you are translating your thought in Hindi
[Guest]: to just English. And main abhi padha hai do hafta pehle. And I was like, she was damn
[Guest]: right. She was damn right. Because I was just thinking. And in IIT, at least Kanpur, the
[Guest]: culture is not to speak in English. You know, it's very Hindi focused, like in our hostels,
[Guest]: etc. Hindi mein baat karte hain. Toh poora tha. Now, I don't know how that happened,
[Guest]: but now I think in English. Uswaq main Hindi mein sochta tha. Toh whatever used to come
[Guest]: in my head, I used to just, she, I don't know how, but she picked it. She said, it looks
[Guest]: like you are just translating your raw thought in Hindi on your blog, which is admirable
[Guest]: because I get your sentiment. But on that process, you know, you can work on your language,
[Guest]: you know, your grammar is going off, you know. And I read it and I was so thankful to her
[Guest]: that, you know, she took the time to read and give, like kaun itna acha feedback deta
[Guest]: hai aaj ke time pe. It's beautiful, but how did you react at the time? Haan, so I was
[Guest]: listening. So I, so I honestly don't remember the specifics of what I felt, but I just thanked
[Guest]: her uswaqt that, you know, thank you so much for reading. I will think about it. You're right.
[Guest]: But I don't think that I had that appreciation of what that message meant until now, because
[Guest]: in retrospection, now that I can see that, that she caught it, that, you know, and why I,
[Guest]: unfortunately, I didn't know it. Like I was in Bombay in May and, you know, this couple lives
[Guest]: in Bombay and I was there and I met her after eight years. I first met, you know, when they
[Guest]: just started dating and I was in Bombay for my work, for my internship. So we were meeting after
[Guest]: eight years and we just had this chat. Uske baad jaake mene, and you know, I remember in that,
[Guest]: you know, we were in that restaurant and talking and she just said, I'm hearing that, you know,
[Guest]: now you're getting published in places, very glad to know. So when I saw that message,
[Guest]: I just felt that, you know, if I knew it that time, you know, I would have thanked her that,
[Guest]: you know, like people like, and like, we don't, we haven't spoken at all, but you know what I'm
[Guest]: trying to say. It's just beautiful that, that's what I'm saying, generosity, that, you know,
[Guest]: people, and that's, you know, some of, one of my faiths that even that, you know, if I fuck up,
[Guest]: if I put out a bad piece of writing, but the intent is visible to people, you know,
[Amit Varma]: they will, they will support you. And I'm just thinking aloud, that such generosity
[Amit Varma]: from someone at that age is likely to come more from women, because men get so competitive.
[Amit Varma]: Do you feel that that's something that you've sort of noticed?
[Guest]: I know that now that you mentioned it, I'm just trying to think about
[Guest]: the feedback that I've received from women, right? And it's true. Like, actually, I can give you one
[Guest]: more story on this when, so I've been in this newslettering, I've been fascinated by this
[Guest]: and fascinated by newsletters since early 2018. Okay, 2018, like, when no one knew Substack,
[Guest]: I was on Substack, I was trying to do something. While having a job at HT, I started something.
[Guest]: Again, let's not get into it, I'll always say it's bad, but whatever. So one day, what I did,
[Guest]: I wrote a newsletter and I tried to be funny. And I'm not funny, as a person. I'm not, you know,
[Guest]: wit and, you know, funny. I mean, that's not me. I was never that person, you know,
[Guest]: but I tried to be smart. You know, then I was recommending, actually, I was,
[Guest]: that was post where I was recommending a list of podcasts. Okay, ki aaj mein par kuch nahi hai,
[Guest]: Diwali ki chhutti hai, something like that. Aur uska intro tha na, I was pretending to be smart,
[Guest]: that you know, witty. And then this someone I knew from college, she was a postgraduate student.
[Guest]: She wrote me a long email. Okay, she said, look Samarth, I'll be honest with you.
[Guest]: What have you written? This is not you. Okay, I have seen what you, so I was the editor of the,
[Guest]: like, my favorite memory from college is that I revamped my campus newspaper and I wrote,
[Guest]: she said, I know what you did there. What, something, something that, I'm not, I'm forgetting
[Guest]: the specifics, but her, and see, I've seen what you're doing in other newsletters. And usse pehle
[Guest]: she has responded saying that, great piece, why don't you do this? Yeh kya likha hai tumne? This
[Guest]: is not you. You're trying to be someone who you're not, and it's visible. And it was,
[Guest]: and I was like, I could not say anything because she was right. But I would not have realized this
[Guest]: because in my head, I was trying to be, you know, this smart guy, witty person. But jab usme hai
[Guest]: nahi, so I'm saying that someone would be like, someone can say na, haan chalo, bad piece chalo,
[Guest]: aagey bado. The fact that someone takes the effort, and in today's age, you can always be
[Guest]: doubtful na ki, mai criticize karunga, to how will the other person take it? Like you've, she,
[Guest]: I don't know, but I just loved it that people do this. And you're an outlier boss, because I have
[Amit Varma]: gotten burnt more than once giving honest feedback to people I thought were friends and who would be
[Amit Varma]: receptive towards it. Because, and this is something I, I'm at pains to tell anyone who
[Amit Varma]: participates in my writing course about that if there is one thing that you should not do,
[Amit Varma]: you should not react with anger to criticism. Yeah, you know, even if you feel criticism is
[Amit Varma]: coming from a bad place, never ever react. And reacting with anger is actually reflexive and
[Amit Varma]: understandable. Because often we put so much emotional energy into what we write, that it
[Amit Varma]: becomes tied up with our sense of self. Toh kisi ne mere piece ko criticize kiya, toh personal
[Amit Varma]: attack lagta hai. So that's a natural instinct. Yeah, that's a natural instinct. But you got to
[Amit Varma]: fight the natural instinct, and take a step back and not react with anger and then think about it.
[Amit Varma]: And very few people do that. So you know, and perhaps she knew you were that kind of person.
[Amit Varma]: So she felt emboldened to sort of send you that like, you know, before this episode started,
[Amit Varma]: you gifted me this book by Robert Sapolsky, Behave. And I think one of the point which I'm
[Amit Varma]: really looking forward to digging into and one of the points Sapolsky has made in this,
[Amit Varma]: if I remember correctly, in his episode with Sam Harris is about, you know, how the reason there
[Amit Varma]: is so much violence among young males is that the male brain really develops fully only by the age
[Amit Varma]: of 25. I think it's a frontal cortex, which is responsible for that socializing part of behavior
[Amit Varma]: and all of that. And that really develops only by, you know, 25, which is why you have so much
[Amit Varma]: violence among, you know, teenage males, and the bulk of violence in society really comes from young
[Amit Varma]: males. And that's interesting. And that may also speak to, you know, the observation,
[Amit Varma]: which otherwise seems to be a stereotype, and I avoid them. But the fact is that young women are
[Guest]: just more mature than young men. Do you think it's also goes otherwise,
[Amit Varma]: in terms of receiving feedback? Yeah, I think men would be worse at receiving feedback.
[Amit Varma]: But having said that, women already have, you know, what is known as a confidence gap. Yeah,
[Amit Varma]: the imposter syndrome is so much more likely in women. So they could actually react the other
[Amit Varma]: way and not think independently about feedback and let it get them down. You know, even if the
[Amit Varma]: feedback is unwarranted. So I think that is a danger the other way. Yeah, I was recently listening
[Guest]: to this podcast by Michael Lewis is one of my favorite writers, my writing inspiration,
[Guest]: actually. So his season three of his podcast, Against the Rules is on experts. So he had one
[Guest]: episode on mansplaining, you know, that he was on history. So I you know, that what I think was
[Amit Varma]: the writer Rebecca Solnit, I'm forgetting. Rebecca Solnit wrote this book.
[Amit Varma]: Men Explain Things to Me, right? Yeah.
[Guest]: So she was the intro, like, she was explaining what happened, the origins that she was in this
[Guest]: party. And this guy, you know, this dude is telling her about the book about, you know,
[Guest]: like she said, you know, my writer and makes nasty comments and ends up talking about a book that she
[Guest]: wrote. Yeah, right. And it was she and he clearly hadn't read the book. So they were describing
[Guest]: that. And then Lewis goes into he starts a story that this was the origin of mansplaining,
[Guest]: and ends with some research on exactly this point that this whole business of mansplaining
[Guest]: comes from, you know, the sense of men feeling superior in a group about bullshitting that they
[Guest]: know, and women not adequately responding to it. And the the point he was trying to make,
[Guest]: actually, his core point was that after you have done this, you don't realize what you have done.
[Guest]: So you become, the gap increases. It's not that you feel embarrassed that oh, you know,
[Guest]: no, you don't feel embarrassed about it. You double down on it. And when you double down on it,
[Guest]: your habit keeps on perpetuating, it doesn't go down. So there was some research that he
[Guest]: was quoting, which I found pretty interesting, because he said that doesn't go back the other
[Guest]: way. That once in that research, I think I'm, maybe you can link it in the show notes. But
[Guest]: that's what he was saying that it doesn't happen the other way that when that woman realizes that
[Guest]: what this guy is doing, that it's not that the guy is doubling down on his overconfidence,
[Guest]: right? But that's the same thing is not happening on the side of women. So the gap kind of increases
[Guest]: and mansplaining keeps becoming a thing. Yeah, there's this lovely cartoon I like where this
[Amit Varma]: man is at dinner with a woman and he's telling her across the table, let me interrupt your
[Unknown]: expertise with my confidence. And that kind of says everything that women don't have enough faith
[Amit Varma]: in their expertise. And men have too much unwarranted self confidence. But Amit, can I
[Guest]: ask a tough question here? And maybe politically incorrect, but why don't we bring it up?
[Guest]: So there's another effect that happens with me. And I want to know what, so I'll again give you
[Guest]: an incident. Oh my God, I you know, I hope this person is not listening to it. Because I'm
[Amit Varma]: describing a scenario. I think by so many times you've said I hope so and so is not listening
[Amit Varma]: to it that I think you have the impression no one listens to the podcast mechanical.
[Unknown]: Oh my God, I didn't mean that. Anyway. So anyway, so there was this time in the newsroom,
[Guest]: when there was this, I think it was seven o'clock in the evening. And there was a story.
[Guest]: I don't go into details, because details don't matter. And there was this my colleague at HT,
[Guest]: she was supposed to report the story, some development had happened. And I also used to
[Guest]: cover similar things. And so you know, the 7pm news had broken something, something, something,
[Guest]: we had to write a story. And there was a confusion, what is happening? So then she said that,
[Guest]: you know, this is the story. And because it was something related to tech, which is something I've
[Guest]: deeply thought about and worked on. So I was like, this is wrong. It's not like that, right? And she
[Guest]: was like, no, this is it. So there was almost this debate. And I regret that I think I don't remember,
[Guest]: but I think I, my voice, you know, I think it was not like I shouted is not my, I raised my voice a
[Guest]: bit. You know, I was just frustrated, that why don't you understand that? Like, you're wrong.
[Guest]: That you know, that's not the story. This is the story and I'm telling you. It was a confusion.
[Guest]: Then for some reason, you know, I think my thing prevailed. Fortunately, next day,
[Guest]: I was right that, you know, I was, I was hitting the right story. But that incident
[Guest]: stuck with me because I always felt that, you know, I was right, but I somehow like,
[Guest]: I don't know this tension between how do I isolate that whether I'm just being,
[Guest]: you know, this overconfident man in a setting, or, you know,
[Guest]: it's just like, you know, right, like, this is the story. This is not the story. Like,
[Guest]: I, you know, something like, I actually know more than you on this, you know. And this is the so,
[Guest]: I don't know where the tension goes. But sometimes you just feel and that, which is why I'm saying
[Guest]: it's politically incorrect. Because I know when you are in in a structure of privilege in a larger
[Guest]: scheme of things, right? How do you isolate whether you're acting as the quote unquote oppressor,
[Guest]: or, you know, the powerful in the dynamics, or you are outside that structure on the fundamentals,
[Guest]: I think you, you know, you can take it about religion, like, I'll give you another example.
[Guest]: There's someone wrote a column saying that you can't upper caste Hindu man can't criticize a
[Guest]: Muslim woman journalist. Okay, I read that. And I read the book of I don't want to take names here.
[Guest]: And I in my notes, I have criticism of this specific person. And I don't want to take names
[Guest]: of this specific person. And I went into this deep thought here. I am in my head not thinking
[Guest]: in terms of identity. I am again, I as I said, I try to think that I'm a first principles thinker.
[Guest]: This is journalism 101. It's not mapping up. So what I want to ask you is that have you ever
[Guest]: this tension between identity? And like, that I'm not behaving, my identity is not overpowering me
[Guest]: in this situation. It's independent of that. So I don't know, I've not figured out a way.
[Guest]: Because, you know, I just feel that, you know, I'm on the other side. So like, I just know,
[Amit Varma]: want to know what you think of it. So yeah, but what thinking about there are three
[Amit Varma]: sort of thoughts which come to mind. And one thought is that in the instance of the discussion
[Amit Varma]: you had with your colleague about the tech thing, you actually knew more than her, or, you know,
[Amit Varma]: at least, it wasn't as if it was her expertise, and you were mansplaining to her. Mansplaining
[Amit Varma]: typically is when the man knows nothing, and the woman is the expert, and he's telling her something
[Amit Varma]: that she knows more about. So, you know, those are the bare facts. I think every time you explain
[Amit Varma]: something to somebody, it's not an act of splaining, necessarily. So just to apply that
[Amit Varma]: hammer to every nail may not always be fair, but we need to watch out for ourselves doing that,
[Amit Varma]: and make sure that we don't kind of do that. The other thing is that there is this, like at,
[Amit Varma]: like I tell everyone who interacts with me that take me at face value, that mere kuch, you know,
[Amit Varma]: beyond what I say, there is no, you know, don't read subtext into it, don't think that I intend
[Amit Varma]: something I didn't say, take me at face value, don't add a layer to it. I didn't get it.
[Amit Varma]: Don't, we should not take you at face value. No, take me at face value. Yeah, take me at
[Amit Varma]: face value. And always assume goodwill. Assume that what I am saying is what I mean.
[Amit Varma]: So I like to have a conversation without layers. Like now when we are speaking to each other,
[Amit Varma]: I don't think we are thinking things like,
[Amit Varma]: Amit, why did you ask this? You know, what does this mean? And so there is, it's just face value.
[Amit Varma]: And that's the kind of conversation I like to have. However, the thing is that sometimes there
[Amit Varma]: are other layers, even if you don't want there to be. So for example, if you are, you know,
[Amit Varma]: like I remember once I was driving with a couple of friends to a mall in Bombay,
[Amit Varma]: and I was weaving my way through traffic. I'm a typical Bombay driver. In fact, I think I'm the
[Amit Varma]: best driver in the world in Bombay. So I'm a typical Bombay driver, lane change.
[Amit Varma]: And we reached a mall. And as we got into the mall, these two women got into the lift with us,
[Amit Varma]: and one of them started shouting at me that you only overtook me because I'm a woman.
[Amit Varma]: Because I didn't look inside the other cars, I was just doing my thing.
[Amit Varma]: And so I was just about to respond that no, ma'am,
[Amit Varma]: aisi koi baat nahi hai, aisa nahi tha. When the friend who was with me,
[Amit Varma]: he kind of just tapped me on the shoulder and said, you know, don't argue back.
[Amit Varma]: And then later, he told me that you have to understand where she's coming from.
[Amit Varma]: She's coming from a place where she's at the receiving end of a lot of shit from men,
[Amit Varma]: literally all women are, right. So it is natural for her on a bad traffic day to feel ki oh shit,
[Amit Varma]: there's another man just going past me. Right? So don't argue back. Just take it. There's no point
[Amit Varma]: in, you know, have some sympathy and some empathy for where she is from. And I thought that was an
[Amit Varma]: important lesson for me. Ki waha pe face value doesn't work. Waha pe you have to realize that
[Amit Varma]: there is a layer. And maybe you have to step back and realize that there is a layer. However,
[Amit Varma]: obviously, in a case of an argument in a newsroom, you can't step back from the truth. You know,
[Amit Varma]: when you when you're arguing something like what you're arguing, I would say you have to argue that
[Guest]: but perhaps you have to watch out for your tone. Yeah, tone. That's what I'm saying.
[Amit Varma]: So to another guy, it's okay, it's a conversation to a girl, you know, she would just shrink back.
[Amit Varma]: It's so I think recognizing those layers are important. And as far and my third thought on
[Amit Varma]: this is that when you talk about, you know, somebody saying that you don't have a right
[Amit Varma]: to criticize somebody because of your identity of birth. Yeah, I feel that if it's a particular
[Amit Varma]: person, you know, it's okay to be aware of that context and tailor your tone and conversation
[Amit Varma]: accordingly. But if a third person is giving that criticism, I feel it's bullshit. And it's
[Amit Varma]: bullshit. Because I feel the problem with a lot of modern identity politics is people get reduced
[Amit Varma]: to identities of birth. Whereas we contain multitudes, we are deeply complex, I find it
[Amit Varma]: offensive if someone reduces me to an identity over which I had no control. Right. And I also
[Amit Varma]: find it not helpful when someone less privileged than me is also pigeonholed and imprisoned in an
[Amit Varma]: identity trap and given a narrative of victimhood when they are also a lot more than that. Absolutely.
[Amit Varma]: So I just feel that this kind of politics is toxic to the discourse that we have to be aware
[Amit Varma]: of privileges. Obviously, we have to be aware of all of that and mindful of that. But to reduce
[Amit Varma]: all interactions to just being an interaction between identities of birth, I think can be
[Amit Varma]: really toxic. And it is offensive to everybody involved. Because we are not just one thing.
[Amit Varma]: We are many things. So these are my sort of thinking allowed kind of responses.
[Guest]: Have you ever been has there ever been a phase where you felt guilty about your privilege?
[Guest]: Has that ever happened?
[Amit Varma]: I haven't felt guilty about my privilege, because it is what it is. But I have been guilty of the
[Amit Varma]: blindness that my privilege has given me in certain contexts, like in this specific context,
[Amit Varma]: where, you know, my friend Salil told me that, no, you know, there are times you just got to sit
[Amit Varma]: back and listen, right? Right. So, so I might have felt I felt guilty, not of my privilege itself,
[Amit Varma]: but ways in which it has made me behave. Like looking back today, much the same way that you
[Amit Varma]: look back through your journaling, looking back to my childhood, I can see that, you know, because
[Amit Varma]: of family background, and because of all of that, I had both a social arrogance and an intellectual
[Amit Varma]: arrogance. And both of them were unwarranted. And I would assume that, of course, they might have
[Amit Varma]: made me behave in ways which are absolutely obnoxious. You know, and I think that, hey,
[Amit Varma]: I wouldn't want to know that person today. And it is possible I behave today in ways that I
[Amit Varma]: might find obnoxious 10 years later, who knows, but not by privilege itself, because that is luck,
[Amit Varma]: right? And both of us understand probability well enough to know that he gets mostly everything is
[Amit Varma]: luck, right? And it is what it is, you know, it's not like I did something to be guilty about it.
[Amit Varma]: But the question is, how do I behave now? Which is because you got to judge people by their actions.
[Guest]: Yeah, I think this happened, you know, because I asked this because there was a phase when it
[Guest]: hit me, you know, like, you know, it is a time when just it hits you that boss, you're privileged.
[Guest]: There is so much because you tend to give yourself too much credit.
[Guest]: Yeah. But then I saw other things started happening.
[Guest]: Okay. If I start attributing everything to privilege, then I feel like I have no agency.
[Guest]: Yeah. You know, so it's a tension, right?
[Guest]: In other, you're saying,
[Guest]: So then, like, who you are, like, is there, does that mean that I don't have any agency?
[Amit Varma]: So you mentioned free will earlier. Yeah. And my take on free will is,
[Amit Varma]: I don't believe it exists. It cannot possibly exist, but we must behave as if it does.
[Amit Varma]: Okay. Because then how will we live?
[Guest]: How will we live? Yeah, absolutely. That's actually a good frame.
[Guest]: Interesting. But yeah, so, then one day I said, okay, now it is there.
[Guest]: So what will I do? Guilt is, I think, the worst feeling, you know, in guilt and jealousy.
[Guest]: I think these two are, like, very bad human emotions. So then I said, you know, be conscious.
[Guest]: And then, Amit, one thing that I still struggle with is that, in fact,
[Guest]: we are talking about how I think, etc., etc.
[Guest]: Now, we should have put a caveat in the starting that one of the reasons that the fact that,
[Guest]: you know, whatever decisions you take, right, there is so much, like, risk-taking, right?
[Guest]: I mean, if you talk about probability, right?
[Guest]: You know, sometimes when, you know, my friends from college, they say, you know,
[Guest]: You know, I was like, I'm happy for you.
[Guest]: But boss, if you think objectively about what is risk, you have to think about the worst-case
[Guest]: scenario, right?
[Guest]: And when you start giving in that frame, right, in distribution, worst case, etc.,
[Guest]: at deal events, etc., then that hit me that that is what the privilege does, that
[Guest]: Very true.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: So, when I wrote a blog on my freelancing journey, you know, which I,
[Guest]: because people kept asking me and I wanted to explain my model.
[Guest]: So, I started that piece with a long, you know, description, boss.
[Guest]: Because I used to see on Twitter that everyone has a bad experience freelancing.
[Guest]: You know, no one is giving money, no assignments are coming.
[Guest]: People were paying me money on time.
[Guest]: I was getting assignments.
[Guest]: So, I was like, what is happening?
[Guest]: My experience.
[Guest]: So, if I write, you know,
[Guest]: That is also misleading.
[Guest]: So, I don't know.
[Guest]: So, I wrote, I think, 300 words in the starting to explain that, boss, this is a privilege,
[Guest]: this is a privilege.
[Guest]: So, please don't generalize.
[Guest]: Okay?
[Guest]: The game is different.
[Guest]: It is, this is what works for me because this.
[Guest]: But I will not write after every sentence that, you know, I have network, I have this,
[Guest]: whatever, whatever.
[Guest]: So, I put it.
[Guest]: The feedback I got was very interesting.
[Guest]: Because then people said that the fact that some of my friends, I asked them,
[Guest]: they said that those 300 words kind of, you know, it didn't feel like
[Guest]: I am describing some sort of ideal scenario that anyone can do it,
[Guest]: but this person did it.
[Guest]: You know, because of that context, that look, this is there.
[Guest]: So, that actually makes me more comfortable.
[Guest]: That once you acknowledge, then talk freely.
[Guest]: Because, you know, you're sorted, you're saying that I acknowledge.
[Guest]: But not to get into that loop.
[Guest]: Because if you start tracing back about everything, then it's a never-ending cycle.
[Guest]: That so, I don't know how many places it can be.
[Guest]: That's the context I control.
[Guest]: But sometimes I feel that, you know, even when I hear conversations people are having.
[Guest]: I did this.
[Guest]: Especially on LinkedIn, which is kind of a very, I don't know, toxic positivity,
[Guest]: toxic motivation is there.
[Guest]: You know, everyone has their own journey.
[Guest]: All of that.
[Guest]: Which is like, on one hand, I appreciate that, you know, people have struggles.
[Guest]: But sometimes it just feels that, what is your context?
[Guest]: And, you know, in the writing, you could see that, is this like,
[Guest]: is it shining or not?
[Guest]: I recently saw a post.
[Guest]: This person was, listen to this.
[Guest]: I hope he listens to your podcast and listens to it.
[Guest]: But this guy was some rank 35 in ITJ.
[Guest]: You know, like, topper.
[Guest]: He was complex that he has got a rank of 35.
[Guest]: Because there were 34 kids above him in IIT Bombay.
[Guest]: I was reading that and Amit, I became so angry.
[Guest]: After that, he wrote, look, I was in such a complex.
[Guest]: But then I did this in IIT Bombay.
[Guest]: Then I started a company.
[Guest]: This and that.
[Guest]: I didn't know what.
[Guest]: I just angry messaged one of my friends.
[Guest]: You know, this is why I hate LinkedIn.
[Guest]: What is this?
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: So, after seeing that, I thought, at least there is some understanding.
[Guest]: But I am saying that, you know, like, what would that make you feel?
[Guest]: I mean, if you are having an inferiority complex at 35.
[Amit Varma]: This means that these people are becoming slaves of anti-metric.
[Guest]: So, it's bad.
[Guest]: Also, like this, I mean, I am sorry, I am judging this person.
[Guest]: But he also started a startup, right?
[Guest]: All of those things he did.
[Guest]: And his surname is an upper-caste Hindu surname.
[Guest]: So, I said, man, look, I am happy, you know, you build this company.
[Guest]: Your exit is done.
[Guest]: Whatever.
[Guest]: And he's happy in life.
[Guest]: Married, married.
[Guest]: Whatever it is.
[Guest]: He's like, lights his post.
[Guest]: But it just was so, I don't know the word, maybe disgust that.
[Amit Varma]: Like, what is this platform?
[Amit Varma]: Because let me tell you why disgust.
[Amit Varma]: I feel the same way.
[Amit Varma]: Because this is one category.
[Amit Varma]: There are three categories of wrong people.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm just thinking aloud, right?
[Amit Varma]: First category of wrong people.
[Amit Varma]: And this is from a perspective of probability.
[Amit Varma]: First category of wrong people is people to whom good things have happened.
[Amit Varma]: And they don't realize it's 99% luck.
[Amit Varma]: And they let it go to their heads.
[Amit Varma]: And they get arrogant and whatever.
[Amit Varma]: That's category one.
[Amit Varma]: Category two is people to whom bad things have happened.
[Amit Varma]: And they don't realize that is 99% luck.
[Amit Varma]: And they let it get them down and they whatever.
[Amit Varma]: The third category, the kind of person you're mentioning,
[Amit Varma]: is a person to whom good things have happened.
[Amit Varma]: It is perhaps 100% luck, this thing.
[Amit Varma]: And they are moaning and whining.
[Amit Varma]: And these are people, you know, I mean, I don't believe in violence.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm saying this in a metaphorical way.
[Amit Varma]: But the feeling of one tight slap comes with them.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: So I just want to end with, I mean, we've talked a lot about this.
[Guest]: But one thought which I learned very recently on this whole luck thing.
[Guest]: Have you read The Blind Watchmaker by Richard Dawkins?
[Guest]: Brilliant book, I've read.
[Guest]: So I was connecting to this whole frame.
[Guest]: Because, you know, once you get into a probabilistic mindset,
[Guest]: you see randomness everywhere, right?
[Guest]: So one thing he says, right, in the book that in evolution,
[Guest]: creationists who don't believe in the science of evolution,
[Guest]: they think natural selection is random, right?
[Guest]: Things are happening randomly.
[Guest]: So how is it possible that randomness can create complex species like humans?
[Guest]: So Dawkins says in the book, that is wrong.
[Guest]: Natural selection is not random.
[Guest]: It's opposite of random, because what is happening,
[Guest]: every step of a mutation, that is random.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Guest]: But when you cumulatively collect everything together,
[Guest]: that is far from random, because after every mutation,
[Guest]: what stays, what dies, what propagates,
[Guest]: that is operating on principles of natural selection, which is not random, right?
[Guest]: So there is randomness at every step.
[Guest]: But in the larger collective, like what ultimately becomes, that is not random.
[Amit Varma]: Events versus systems, as you might put it.
[Guest]: But no, even there's difference here, that if you think about careers, right?
[Guest]: Like I, my theory is clear.
[Guest]: My entire career is built on some random events.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: But then in retrospect, I feel that randomness is there.
[Guest]: But there is some, if you take that frame,
[Guest]: at what point, so many random things are happening.
[Guest]: And then in those random things, you pick one.
[Guest]: And in retrospect, you attribute everything.
[Guest]: And I have done it to that one random incident.
[Guest]: But I'm saying that if you take one layer above it, that in cumulative, right?
[Guest]: Random plus that, what you, you know, like you chose something,
[Guest]: you didn't choose something.
[Guest]: So everything is not just happening by itself.
[Guest]: There is some, some layer to it.
[Guest]: Some layer to it, just like evolution.
[Guest]: So if you, as a person say, if everything goes right, I live till 80, right?
[Guest]: And whatever I become, so it's luck.
[Guest]: A lot of things like right from birth, but then there's also a design.
[Guest]: What do you think about that?
[Guest]: Do you think that framework of evolution and natural selection applies to our lives?
[Amit Varma]: Two things, I mean, one, of course, and I'm not an expert on either of these,
[Amit Varma]: but you know, when Dawkins is talking about that larger process that is playing out,
[Amit Varma]: it is a particular process that mutations are random,
[Amit Varma]: but whether those mutations, you know, help you propagate your genes is not random.
[Amit Varma]: Whatever is most suited to the environment will help you.
[Amit Varma]: And in that sense that there is, you know, that process playing itself out in human affairs.
[Amit Varma]: I think the danger is of looking back in hindsight and ascribing narratives.
[Amit Varma]: Yes. And I think that's, and you know, that danger better than anybody else, obviously.
[Guest]: That's not true.
[Amit Varma]: But I mean, you know, with all your writings about journalism and data journalism and,
[Amit Varma]: and yeah, and I think we need to kind of watch out for that.
[Amit Varma]: Like at one, at one level, there is no free will.
[Amit Varma]: And all our talk of probabilities are just because we don't, we are not omniscient.
[Amit Varma]: Otherwise we would not talk of them.
[Amit Varma]: But anyway, leaving that self-indulgent aside, you know, we are the way we are.
[Amit Varma]: So maybe, so it's again, you know,
[Amit Varma]: you could say that there are particular events which are completely accidental
[Amit Varma]: and they take us in directions we wouldn't have gone in otherwise.
[Amit Varma]: But you could also say that we are who we are.
[Amit Varma]: Maybe some other way.
[Amit Varma]: It's, it's like, you know,
[Amit Varma]: there are a million parallel universes with a million asses and who knows where we are.
[Amit Varma]: And this is perhaps the only one where you and I are sitting and talking right now.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: And you know, this way, I absolutely love the book.
[Guest]: But I'm like,
[Guest]: And when I read this, I was like, come on, man.
[Guest]: So now when you create these narratives, random, random, random.
[Guest]: But that's why, you know, I think it's just interesting to, you know,
[Guest]: you know, link that the way biological evolution works, if that has parallels to.
[Guest]: So I'm still thinking about it.
[Guest]: I think it's an interesting layer to add over everything is random.
[Amit Varma]: So many layers, so many frames and, and it's, and it's time to take a break.
[Amit Varma]: So we'll come back after the break and continue this conversation.
[Amit Varma]: in your email inbox, you don't need to go anywhere.
[Amit Varma]: So subscribe now for free.
[Amit Varma]: The India Uncut newsletter at indiancut.substack.com.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: I'm chatting with Samarth Bansal about his life.
[Amit Varma]: And we I think spoke for two and a half hours and we just barely, you know, reached your school years.
[Amit Varma]: But you did mention while you were briefly mentioning your college years as well,
[Amit Varma]: you mentioned that IIT shaped you.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about that, that how did it shape you in the sense that
[Amit Varma]: what was your conception of yourself before that and what you want to do in your life and
[Amit Varma]: so on and so forth?
[Amit Varma]: And how did IIT sharpen that?
[Amit Varma]: And how did the sort of the wider social world that you were suddenly in?
[Amit Varma]: How did, how did that change you?
[Guest]: I mean, that's such a broad question.
[Guest]: So I'll start, but please you direct as it goes, because I have like so
[Guest]: fond and conflicted memories of that brilliant institute that it can go for forever.
[Guest]: But anyway, so I, so IIT happened, this is 2011.
[Guest]: Before I was going to IIT, I saw this, actually, when I was preparing for JEE,
[Guest]: there was this show on CBS 60 Minutes.
[Guest]: I think Leslie Stahl was the anchor.
[Guest]: And it opened by something, you know, something like, I'm forgetting the exact words, but
[Guest]: you know, X country exports something, Y country exports something.
[Guest]: India exports engineers, and not just any engineers, engineers from
[Guest]: the Indian Institute of Technology, right?
[Guest]: Something, something.
[Guest]: And then she made the comparison between Princeton, Harvard.
[Guest]: Basically, that whole segment on that show was something like
[Guest]: these folks at IIT, and it was set up at IIT Bombay, are like best in the world.
[Guest]: Ivy League se bhi tough hai yahaan pe enter karna, these guys are different.
[Guest]: And then Vinod Khosla comes in, all of these people are talking about.
[Guest]: And I saw it as a 16-year-old kid.
[Guest]: And that impression left, you know, the impression in my head was that, oh boy, you know, what
[Guest]: world you are going to enter, right?
[Guest]: And you work hard, you hate everything.
[Guest]: So I had this image in my head, and I told you, like, my dream to become a software engineer
[Guest]: was back when I was in seventh grade, when I started creating websites, you know, do
[Guest]: you remember Geocities?
[Guest]: Yeah, of course.
[Unknown]: So I had all those pages, Flash, and I was doing all of those things.
[Guest]: So I had this impression that main IIT jaunga, and waha pe everyone, you know, in dorm rooms
[Guest]: will be writing code, you know, kuch kuch hora hoga waha pe.
[Guest]: And like, it was going to be this massive burst of scientific exploration, technological
[Guest]: innovation.
[Guest]: And the other thing happened in, I'm giving context because of what I expected.
[Guest]: I heard the speech, you know, the Steve Jobs 2005 Convocation at Stanford.
[Guest]: Have you, do you know?
[Amit Varma]: Incredible speech, stay hungry, stay foolish.
[Guest]: Wo pandra minute ka jo hai na, I've heard it repeatedly during college also.
[Guest]: Har 6 maine mein main sunta tha ek baar, just to, so that many eleventh mein sun liya tha.
[Guest]: So in twelfth grade, I was like, okay, I had this conviction that I was destined to become
[Guest]: the next Steve Jobs.
[Guest]: I mean, that's a 17-year-old me.
[Guest]: I find that guy a bit obnoxious, but that was who I was.
[Amit Varma]: But every 17-year-old should dream.
[Amit Varma]: Should dream, right?
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So waise tha, and I was like, code bhi karenge, company banayenge, entrepreneur banna hai,
[Guest]: all of those dreams were there.
[Guest]: And I, so that is what I went in.
[Guest]: And I go, and there's nothing like that.
[Guest]: Although, it's, you know, you get a culture shock because you don't, you're not fine.
[Guest]: Like first, mein ragging ho rahi hai, you know, all kinds of things are happening.
[Guest]: You don't find this energy that I was expecting.
[Guest]: So it was a, for whatever reason, misleading expectation.
[Guest]: Toh wo starting mein toh I just had to accept the fact that that is not what this institute
[Guest]: is.
[Guest]: But I had, despite that, so after that shock, you adjust.
[Guest]: I also, because that was the first time I left home, like a lot of my friends had been
[Guest]: to Kota and other places.
[Guest]: Merle toh naya tha to adjust, so many different people, like we had this hostel wing, 13 rooms,
[Guest]: 3 people each, all from different backgrounds.
[Guest]: In fact, interestingly, people talk about, like one of the best things about IIT Kanpur
[Guest]: is that our hostel allocation is random.
[Guest]: So, you know, the caste, class, all of that is mixed.
[Guest]: You don't pick that way, right?
[Guest]: So brilliant.
[Guest]: So I settled in, made comfort with what was happening.
[Guest]: And, you know, starting everyone is excited.
[Guest]: My first semester was great.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: I did excellent at exams.
[Guest]: I was participating in extra extracurricular activities, dance, you know, played guitar
[Guest]: at my, you know, hostel day.
[Guest]: All of those things are happening.
[Guest]: I'm having the best of my time.
[Guest]: Everything is fine.
[Guest]: And I'm also just adjusting ki maze bhi karne hain.
[Guest]: You know, we have come.
[Guest]: So things are going fine.
[Guest]: I think second semester onwards, things started changing.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: I started realizing that, you know, for some reason, not actually for some reason, there
[Guest]: was a clear reason I went, I would go to classes and I could not get the big picture that why
[Guest]: I'm studying this.
[Guest]: So usfak deta ki mujhe pata hona chahiye na main kyu padh rahon.
[Guest]: Toh that was not happening.
[Guest]: And I started feeling a bit disoriented, but still that was in the back of my head.
[Guest]: It was not dominant.
[Guest]: So I was very active in student politics for elections, you know, in our student community,
[Guest]: all of those things are happening.
[Guest]: Maze aa rahe hain.
[Guest]: Things are going fine.
[Guest]: So fast forward, I think then third semester onwards, you know, things started making much
[Guest]: more sense where I see that, look, yeh wo jaga toh hain nahi jo main nahi imagine kari
[Guest]: thi.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: But still, it's a wonderful place because ample opportunity.
[Guest]: If you look at the infrastructure of IIT, you know, the kind of people you meet, you
[Guest]: know, starting mein jaa ke agar aapke andar thoda sa bhi ego hain about ki bhai hum toh
[Guest]: apne school ke raja the.
[Guest]: Pehle din jaa ke, you know, that bubble is burst.
[Guest]: Because you see, boss, everyone around you is great.
[Guest]: Aap physics ka problem kar rahe ho, that other person, your friend, he'll do it faster
[Guest]: than you.
[Guest]: So, you know, IIT makes you humble in many ways.
[Guest]: Wo kabhi jaata nahi hai because you always know ki yaar, you were in that space.
[Guest]: So that was first year, nice.
[Guest]: But third semester onwards, I think my frame started changing.
[Guest]: One big thing that happened was that I read an essay by Paul Graham.
[Guest]: Paul Graham, right?
[Guest]: The VC.
[Guest]: Brilliant essays.
[Guest]: Uska ek line tha in one of his essays where he says that if you want to be an entrepreneur,
[Guest]: don't work at Google.
[Guest]: Because Google is so good.
[Guest]: It's such a great company that you would never want to leave.
[Guest]: I read that line and it touched me.
[Guest]: And Amit, in my third semester, I decided I will not sit for campus placements.
[Guest]: Okay?
[Guest]: And that was so liberating because once you decide ki bhai placement mein toh betna hi
[Guest]: nahi.
[Guest]: So everything that is happening around you, which is optimized for that big job,
[Guest]: wo aapka chala gaya.
[Guest]: So you're not thinking about your resume.
[Guest]: You're not thinking about grades.
[Guest]: Maze karna hai, right?
[Guest]: Ki do what you want to do.
[Guest]: The other thing that happened around that time, I think it was second semester mein hua tha.
[Guest]: Coursera came to this world.
[Guest]: Coursera and Udacity, right?
[Guest]: Massive online open course.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So I started and I was like, class mein toh mereko mazaa nahi raha, what I'm studying.
[Guest]: But it's also not, main toh engineering mein interested hu.
[Guest]: Lekin jo class mein padha rahe hain, wo nahi padhna hai, right?
[Guest]: So I started spending most of my time in online courses.
[Guest]: So I was studying.
[Guest]: I was just not studying what my profs were teaching me, you know?
[Guest]: So my grades stuck.
[Guest]: It's just, you know, like my first semester performance was great.
[Guest]: In fact, I used to joke,
[Guest]: IIT mein B grade ki neeche lana toh matlab kitna tough kaam hai.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: Kitti mehnat karni padhegi na padhne ke liye, you know?
[Guest]: That was my attitude.
[Guest]: And then, you know, C's started coming, D's started coming.
[Guest]: And I was disoriented.
[Guest]: Because on one hand, I said, you know, I came here with this passion of
[Guest]: being like the best engineer.
[Guest]: And this, I was told this is the institute.
[Guest]: But yahan hoi nahi raha hai.
[Guest]: So I started finding communities where people felt like me.
[Guest]: And I did a lot of work in campus, in community building.
[Guest]: And third semester ke baad, again, my grades fell.
[Guest]: Like even, it was the worst.
[Guest]: And I was in such a demotivated state that I wanted to leave the campus.
[Guest]: Ki boss, mera ho gaya hai.
[Guest]: This is not the right place for me.
[Guest]: So I was in Bombay for an internship after my third semester.
[Guest]: I, mere grades jis din aaye, I just could not believe that,
[Guest]: that is not me.
[Guest]: Like, these grades do not reflect who I felt I was.
[Guest]: And wahan cafe mein baith ke,
[Guest]: maine, I wrote a long rant email to my dean of academic affairs,
[Guest]: who had taught,
[Guest]: who had taught and I really respected him for his ethics.
[Guest]: You know, ethics has something been very close to me.
[Guest]: And this professor, still, I just met him a few months ago,
[Guest]: was so central to even an IIT to shape my thinking around ethics.
[Guest]: So I had something that, you know, this guy may understand.
[Guest]: I don't know.
[Guest]: But who writes email to dean?
[Guest]: Main ho email unko itna bada rant lik diya.
[Guest]: That, you know, boss, kya jaga hai ye?
[Guest]: You know, what is happening?
[Guest]: I can't understand.
[Guest]: These grades don't reflect me.
[Guest]: Tak tak tak tak.
[Guest]: I read, main jab bhi usse padhta na, I'm like,
[Guest]: how did I get the courage to write this email?
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: So, you know what the best thing happened?
[Guest]: In 30 minutes, the dean of academic affairs responded.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: He wrote me a long email where he mentioned one thing.
[Guest]: He said, look, don't worry.
[Guest]: He said, you sit down and define what success means to you.
[Guest]: It's not getting a nine point GPA.
[Guest]: It's not eight point.
[Guest]: He said, you say, I want a seven pointer
[Guest]: and I want to do something else at campus.
[Guest]: That is your metric.
[Guest]: Forget everything else.
[Guest]: And then he told me other things.
[Guest]: And his email ended by saying,
[Guest]: when you come to campus, come and meet me.
[Guest]: We'll chat.
[Guest]: And Amit, that mail just changed me because I was like,
[Guest]: this person gets me.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: He understood.
[Guest]: And he's a dean.
[Guest]: And when I met him,
[Guest]: so I think that just made me, ki chalo ab ho gaya hai.
[Guest]: Placement mein bhi nahi baithna hai.
[Guest]: Dean ne bhi bol diya hai yaar ki tu apna kar le.
[Guest]: So I think that zone came in.
[Guest]: But in fourth semester, I had to drop.
[Guest]: I had to go back home because of some family thing.
[Guest]: So that gave me this whole space where I'm not at college.
[Guest]: I was anyway frustrated ki what is happening, what is not happening.
[Guest]: But uswaqt, I was working with a startup.
[Guest]: You know, in my December internship was with a company.
[Guest]: I was the first software developer at that company.
[Guest]: I was like, what, 19 year old working with like,
[Guest]: I was the first employee in that company.
[Guest]: It was a small company.
[Guest]: I was having a ball, you know, to write code, real,
[Guest]: you know, things are happening.
[Guest]: So, but that semester drop, right, like I was, I was telling you, right,
[Guest]: I was going through my Facebook messages.
[Guest]: I think that gave me a lot of time to introspect, ki kya hai, kya nahi.
[Guest]: And then when I went back, I had a different frame.
[Guest]: Toh fir maine yeh sab hataya.
[Guest]: Maine ka dekho, dissatisfaction ka koi point nahi hai.
[Guest]: I realized that main yaha baith ki I can compare IIT to MIT
[Guest]: and I always feel ki boss kya hai.
[Guest]: But when I used to talk to my friends from other engineering colleges,
[Guest]: I was like, boss, do you even realize that
[Guest]: do you even realize that where you are sitting?
[Guest]: It's a privilege that you are getting to study at this institute
[Guest]: with such great infrastructure, with such great people.
[Guest]: So, if you utilize it properly and think, you can do wonders.
[Guest]: So, I think wo sab ho raha tha maape.
[Guest]: So, yeah, then I did whatever I want to do.
[Guest]: I was extremely active in campus affairs, okay.
[Guest]: I was building this company and I was doing my online courses.
[Guest]: Toh iske round my learning was happening.
[Guest]: I was still not reading, which is the only thing I regret.
[Guest]: Possibly in retrospection, I could have done.
[Guest]: But I was doing a lot of online courses
[Guest]: from humanities to computer science to math.
[Guest]: Everything was happening.
[Guest]: My grades were kept going on, you know.
[Guest]: They were not anywhere.
[Guest]: So, that's my journey.
[Guest]: That was, you know, intellectually what was happening
[Guest]: on the academic side and my participation.
[Guest]: Now, and that went on.
[Guest]: Uske baad, ek point ke baad, you know,
[Guest]: I got my first F grade in fifth semester, okay.
[Guest]: It was such a funny thing because I never,
[Guest]: the person who said ki B ke neeche lana toh kitna difficult hai,
[Guest]: aapka F lag gaya.
[Guest]: And then, you know, aapka disorient ho jata that
[Guest]: how can someone like me get an F grade?
[Guest]: Like mai, F, failure on my grade sheet, right.
[Guest]: So, I went to the prof and I said,
[Guest]: Sir, matlab, you know, matlab, can we talk?
[Guest]: Right, you know.
[Guest]: So, pehle woh meko lecture dete hain.
[Guest]: You know, students like you,
[Guest]: there was a time when people used to get D.
[Guest]: They used to come and tell me,
[Guest]: Sir, please give me an F.
[Guest]: Because how can I learn a subject if I have a D grade?
[Guest]: And now I have students like you,
[Guest]: who have an F and they want a D.
[Guest]: So, I said, theek hai, tum exam lo.
[Guest]: You look at your paper.
[Guest]: I turned the pages and I turned the pages
[Guest]: and I could not say anything
[Guest]: because there was nothing in my paper
[Guest]: where I even had the courage to ask him,
[Guest]: ki boss, do something.
[Guest]: So, uske baad mujhe laga ki,
[Guest]: I actually fucked up, right.
[Guest]: And I realized that there is some indiscipline going on here.
[Guest]: Kyuki itna bhi kharab nahi hona chahiye.
[Guest]: So, disorientation end tak raha.
[Guest]: Ki mujhe samajh nahi aara tha what's happening.
[Guest]: But my other part was going really well,
[Guest]: where I was campus community, yeh karenge, woh karenge.
[Guest]: So, things were going great.
[Guest]: Few things that really impacted me in this whole process was my...
[Guest]: I was telling you about,
[Guest]: in this IIT campus, it's not just about people getting jobs and,
[Guest]: you know, there are actually some really smart people doing great things.
[Guest]: You know, that's like the 10% of the campus.
[Guest]: So, you take inspiration from them, other people are doing.
[Guest]: So, it's not completely disillusion, but largely it is,
[Guest]: you see ki yeh India ka aspiration ke liek vehicle hai.
[Guest]: That, you know, people come, they want to get great lives.
[Guest]: That is what this institute is, nothing else.
[Guest]: But there is something else that was happening,
[Guest]: which was that campus had a lot of issues,
[Guest]: socio-political issues,
[Guest]: which is what something that really caught my attention.
[Guest]: Ki cheeze sahi nahi hai yaha pe, you know.
[Guest]: And that is what started troubling me.
[Guest]: Ki iske liye hum kuch karenge.
[Guest]: And the thing about IIT Kanpur is that you are in Kanpur, but
[Guest]: your world, you do not know what is happening outside the four walls of our campus.
[Guest]: So, I'll give you an example.
[Guest]: In 2013, Muzaffarnagar riots happened.
[Guest]: I had no clue those riots happened.
[Guest]: Aur hum Kanpur mein the.
[Guest]: Like, I'm just giving an example.
[Guest]: I was so disconnected.
[Guest]: At the startup, I was working.
[Guest]: There was a time when I had a fight, not fight,
[Guest]: like a disagreement with my employer.
[Guest]: And colleagues that there was a module I had to write,
[Guest]: which would be, you know, it would be like,
[Guest]: I felt that it's invading people's privacy.
[Guest]: You know, ki yeh data points hum profile banayenge.
[Guest]: I was like, yeh mera code hai.
[Guest]: My code can't do this.
[Guest]: You know, you feel an ownership.
[Guest]: Ki mera software hai yaar.
[Guest]: Main yeh nahi kar sakta, all of those things.
[Guest]: But I had no idea.
[Guest]: And at the same time, Snowden revelations were happening in the US.
[Guest]: And I had no clue.
[Guest]: So, I'm saying that my world was limited to the four walls of the campus.
[Guest]: But the things that were troubling me were, you know,
[Guest]: you know what I'm trying to say.
[Guest]: It was just rooted in the campus.
[Guest]: There was no sense of news, nothing.
[Guest]: Aur humein lagta tha humein bahut pata hai.
[Guest]: So, you know, elections ki baat kar lenge.
[Guest]: Very ignorant.
[Guest]: Kuchh pata hi nahi hai, na aap padh rahe ho.
[Guest]: Even humanities courses, we have to compulsorily take humanities courses,
[Guest]: which I don't think a lot of people know,
[Guest]: that from the inception of IIT Kanpur,
[Guest]: humanities is a core part of your engineering curriculum.
[Guest]: Because our founder, P.K. Kelkar, he said that,
[Guest]: engineers work in a society, so they need to know humanities.
[Guest]: So, that way, right?
[Guest]: Toh wo bhi like, you know, aap sociology padh rahe ho,
[Guest]: you know, aap economics padh rahe ho, all of those things.
[Guest]: Social psychology, but bahar nahi pata hai.
[Guest]: But uska advantage yeh tha that I was so, I knew my campus in and out.
[Guest]: Toh waha pe mein ko ek sense start hone laga,
[Guest]: that boss, yaha pe toh kuchh discussions hi nahi ho rahe hain.
[Guest]: Everyone is so involved in day-to-day.
[Guest]: Toh student ka voice kahan se aayega?
[Guest]: Jo hamare campus mein problems hain, uska forum kahan hain?
[Guest]: And waha pe the student newspaper, the magazine,
[Guest]: which was called Vox Populi, which started sometime in mid-2000s,
[Guest]: that, during my, I think, second year, third year, it kind of died out.
[Guest]: It used to be a print magazine.
[Guest]: Someone tried to revamp it, kuchh nahi hua.
[Guest]: So, all of these things, while they were happening,
[Guest]: in my fourth year, when I was catering,
[Guest]: I was like, main isko restart karunga.
[Guest]: You know, this campus needs journalism.
[Guest]: And I was anyway a blogger, I told you, right?
[Guest]: Toh mereko wo tha ki, likhna hai mujhe,
[Guest]: but I want to write about campus affairs.
[Guest]: Because there was this thing I believed at the time, that words matter.
[Guest]: Aur agar hum issues ko raise karenge, toh, you know, kuchh hoga.
[Guest]: And I wanted to bridge the gap between students and faculty.
[Guest]: Toh bahut ideas the, change leke aayenge campus mein.
[Guest]: Koi toh kar nahi raha hai.
[Guest]: Or English, I was telling you, language was weak.
[Guest]: But thankfully, our friends at the Lit Society, they were not,
[Guest]: I don't know what happened,
[Guest]: they dominated kind of the Vox Populi of earlier.
[Guest]: Humare time pe nahi tha.
[Guest]: Toh hume toh kuchh aata hi nahi tha, nah likhna aata hai.
[Guest]: Bas ek wo tha ki, the campus needs a voice.
[Guest]: So me and a friend of mine, one batch junior,
[Guest]: said, chalo hum banayenge.
[Guest]: And that, Amit, was something that really, was brilliant.
[Guest]: Like, you know, that year, when I built like,
[Guest]: hum jaa jaa ke log ko bolte the, that, you know, write for us.
[Guest]: I was giving these talks, that, you know, why campus needs journalism.
[Guest]: Aur kuch journalism ka pata nahi hai, right?
[Guest]: It's just that instinctive desire that, issues need to be discussed.
[Guest]: And then I started seeing, toh humne third August,
[Guest]: 2014 ko website launch kari.
[Guest]: You know, our website was launched.
[Guest]: And phir mene dekha, you know, humare, you know,
[Guest]: starting sab, it's like, you feel like an entrepreneur.
[Guest]: Solving a problem at the campus.
[Guest]: Toh mera woh jo keeda tha, right?
[Guest]: Ki entrepreneur banna hai.
[Guest]: Toh ek time pe aaye hai ki, entrepreneur yaar,
[Guest]: duniya ko baad mein dekh lenge,
[Guest]: apne campus ko toh, kuchh kar lo, right?
[Guest]: Oh, things started happening.
[Guest]: And then I started seeing impact.
[Guest]: I would go to a professor to interview for,
[Guest]: like, humne tumhara woh article padha hai, right?
[Guest]: So these things are happening and that gave me,
[Guest]: you know, it just, I felt so good.
[Guest]: You know, that something is happening,
[Guest]: a conversation is being triggered.
[Guest]: And in all this process, there's one specific incident
[Guest]: that, like, really stood with me,
[Guest]: which was in my final year.
[Guest]: I was going to the campus gate
[Guest]: to book a train ticket to Delhi.
[Guest]: And wahan pe mein gaya and I saw,
[Guest]: there was this bunch of 60 mess workers
[Guest]: were sitting on a hunger strike, okay?
[Guest]: And my first reaction was that,
[Guest]: why is no one around me?
[Guest]: Itne bhi log nahi the, it was at the end of the gate.
[Guest]: No one was stopping, Amit.
[Guest]: These 60 guys are sitting,
[Guest]: and log, they're just passing.
[Guest]: Like, main paanch minute toh khade hoke dekha ki,
[Guest]: does no one want to know ki,
[Guest]: kyu baitha hain yaha pe, right?
[Guest]: So I felt that apathy that I saw in some students.
[Guest]: Pehle toh mujhe bada gussa aaya.
[Guest]: I was very self-righteous, I think, in a way,
[Guest]: back then.
[Guest]: I'm not now.
[Guest]: At least that is what I think.
[Guest]: So, us waqt tha, so mein gaya
[Guest]: and I had my platform.
[Guest]: I called two of my friends.
[Guest]: Humne unka video bana ke,
[Guest]: apne platform pe chalaya.
[Guest]: That triggered a conversation.
[Guest]: Ki, boss,
[Guest]: there is something else going on in this campus,
[Guest]: which we don't know.
[Guest]: And that opened my eyes to the fact that,
[Guest]: IIT community is not about students and faculty and alumni
[Guest]: who do great things in the world,
[Guest]: quote-unquote great things in the world.
[Guest]: The community is also about
[Guest]: our workers.
[Guest]: You know, when you say campus community,
[Guest]: you have to talk about everyone.
[Guest]: And when I heard their story,
[Guest]: and then uske baad maine
[Guest]: bahut history padha aaya IIT Kanpur ko,
[Guest]: I realized that, boss,
[Guest]: right from the genesis of this institute,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: we have fucked this up.
[Guest]: We have not thought about this community at all.
[Guest]: We have ignored them.
[Guest]: Similar things have happened in the past,
[Guest]: but students were relatively more active at the time.
[Guest]: Now they are not.
[Guest]: So jab woh hua na,
[Guest]: maine pehli story toh kari,
[Guest]: where I did the video.
[Guest]: Uske baad,
[Guest]: because I felt so connected to the issue
[Guest]: that I tried ki maine isko solve karunga.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: And I became the,
[Guest]: I spoke so much to these guys,
[Guest]: unka problem samjha,
[Guest]: I went to talk to the faculty,
[Guest]: unka perspective samjha.
[Guest]: And I thought,
[Guest]: this political debate can be solved
[Guest]: if two parties sit next to each other.
[Guest]: Baat karenge na toh solution nikal jaayega.
[Guest]: So I tried with three or four friends,
[Guest]: I think they were postgraduate students,
[Guest]: ki hum yeh karenge.
[Guest]: We were sitting and I remember being,
[Guest]: I became the moderator,
[Guest]: I had my faculty here on the right,
[Guest]: my mess workers on the left.
[Guest]: It was a one hour discussion Amit,
[Guest]: and it went nowhere.
[Guest]: Nothing happened.
[Guest]: Because no one was budging from their position.
[Guest]: At one point I felt,
[Guest]: ki you know,
[Guest]: thoda sa bhi agar dono upar neeche kar le,
[Guest]: maybe something can happen.
[Guest]: So that was my first hit of reality,
[Guest]: that was,
[Guest]: you know these political things,
[Guest]: jo aapko lagta hai na ki,
[Guest]: baat karo aise nahi hota hai.
[Guest]: Second I realized,
[Guest]: ki I was so ignorant about campus.
[Guest]: Mereko uswaq toh mai,
[Guest]: hota hai na dil pigal gaya aapka,
[Guest]: ki people are sitting toh kuch kar lete hain.
[Guest]: But you don't know the complete story,
[Guest]: you don't know their history.
[Guest]: So how complex the issue was,
[Guest]: I had to go to professors to understand
[Guest]: and still I could not.
[Guest]: The thing I regret is,
[Guest]: ki yeh sab maine kar liya,
[Guest]: I didn't write about it.
[Guest]: Because I was so involved in solving the problem,
[Guest]: that I lost the fact that as the,
[Guest]: like I was also a reporter right,
[Guest]: ki likhna hai,
[Guest]: maine story nahi likhi uspe kabhi.
[Guest]: Because, and that left a deep regret in me till date,
[Guest]: ki uswaq kya hua tha.
[Guest]: And I went to campus in 2019,
[Guest]: you know the thing I,
[Guest]: still happens is that,
[Guest]: those people still remember me.
[Guest]: Unko jaisi,
[Guest]: I asked my friend to book a room for me in a hostel,
[Guest]: jaisi unhone naam dekha,
[Guest]: and they were like,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: this guy will help us.
[Guest]: So they had the expectations and,
[Guest]: unhone again bulaya hai,
[Guest]: they said,
[Guest]: ab humare sar yeh problem ho rahi hai,
[Guest]: aap humari help karo.
[Guest]: They got all the documents,
[Guest]: photocopy kar aapke leya hai.
[Guest]: And so I'm saying that,
[Guest]: that lens when I got,
[Guest]: which continues till date,
[Guest]: it showed me that,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: maybe I'm not looking at the world,
[Guest]: like there's so many other things that are happening,
[Guest]: and we are not looking at it.
[Guest]: Like I'm,
[Guest]: maine hain chaar saal nikal diye,
[Guest]: and I never thought about those things.
[Guest]: Right, then I also saw ek baar,
[Guest]: Jadavpur University mein,
[Guest]: I think 14 mein hua tha yeh,
[Guest]: there was a protest,
[Guest]: there was this girl,
[Guest]: who had filed a complaint of molestation,
[Guest]: and the administration did not respond properly.
[Guest]: And students staged a protest,
[Guest]: and police was called,
[Guest]: and the students were beaten.
[Guest]: So to support,
[Guest]: to show solidarity in campus across India,
[Guest]: there were candle march protests were happening,
[Guest]: like, you know.
[Guest]: Toh maine padha,
[Guest]: maine ka hum bhi karenge,
[Guest]: I went to my friend,
[Guest]: who was in the student government,
[Guest]: I said, you know,
[Guest]: boss, karana hai,
[Guest]: usne mana kar diya.
[Guest]: He said no.
[Guest]: And he's one of the,
[Guest]: politically conscious,
[Guest]: very smart guy.
[Guest]: Sai nahi,
[Guest]: as a student gymkhana of IIT Kanpur,
[Guest]: we don't engage in outside politics.
[Guest]: I was so angry.
[Guest]: Ki,
[Guest]: kal koi humare saath bhi hoga na.
[Guest]: Like, I have this thing about administration,
[Guest]: I've written about it.
[Guest]: Toh maine ka,
[Guest]: theek hai.
[Guest]: So that, you know,
[Guest]: maha se,
[Guest]: ko na the sense of rebellion,
[Guest]: mala,
[Guest]: who are these to tell me ki,
[Guest]: hum Jadavpur University ke students ko support nahi karenge.
[Guest]: Toh maine ka,
[Guest]: jo karna hai karo.
[Guest]: I met,
[Guest]: bunch of PG students,
[Guest]: because they are more,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: unlike undergraduates,
[Guest]: post-graduate students are more,
[Guest]: they think beyond.
[Guest]: They're more politically conscious.
[Guest]: Toh humne kara.
[Guest]: And,
[Guest]: humne posters,
[Guest]: hostar,
[Guest]: sabhaaye karwaya.
[Guest]: And,
[Guest]: on the day it was planned,
[Guest]: 100 students scattered at the open-air theatre.
[Guest]: And humne ka,
[Unknown]: you know,
[Guest]: agar ek baar ikathe ho gaye,
[Guest]: toh yeh log kya karenge.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: I didn't take any permissions.
[Guest]: We were there.
[Guest]: Humne ka,
[Guest]: chalo now,
[Guest]: because the only thing was those,
[Guest]: like,
[Guest]: why are you not allowing me,
[Guest]: in my campus,
[Guest]: to express support for students in another campus?
[Guest]: Who are you?
[Guest]: Why can the dean stop me?
[Guest]: Toh humne wo march kiya.
[Guest]: And in fact,
[Guest]: jab bachche aagaye toh,
[Guest]: the security could not do anything.
[Guest]: So, you know,
[Guest]: then you start feeling that,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: challenge authority,
[Guest]: yaar.
[Guest]: Because hum,
[Guest]: we're not even slogans bhi nahi kar rahe the.
[Guest]: We just wanted to,
[Guest]: peacefully march,
[Guest]: to support,
[Guest]: fellow students at another campus.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: How can you say that,
[Guest]: we don't engage in outside politics?
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: So, I think wo build up hota gaya yaha se,
[Guest]: that you know,
[Guest]: it's not just about,
[Guest]: main wahan se start hua,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: Campus hai, but campus mein aur log hain.
[Guest]: Sir hamara hi campus nahi hai,
[Guest]: there are other students,
[Guest]: there are also us.
[Guest]: So, that consciousness started building up.
[Guest]: And parallelly,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: I mean,
[Guest]: I'm saying this is the political part of it,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: And other things are happening.
[Guest]: So, in all this journey,
[Guest]: I think my,
[Guest]: I developed,
[Guest]: more empathy,
[Guest]: when,
[Guest]: like,
[Guest]: politically conscious toh main hua hai,
[Guest]: but empathy.
[Guest]: Because,
[Guest]: I reported a story about,
[Guest]: the struggles of Hindi medium students,
[Guest]: in campus.
[Guest]: It blew me away.
[Guest]: Because,
[Guest]: when I spoke to this guy,
[Guest]: the junior,
[Guest]: he told me ki,
[Guest]: boss,
[Guest]: main apne wing mein,
[Guest]: compared to everyone else,
[Guest]: main saari class jaata hu,
[Guest]: I attend all classes.
[Guest]: I work triple hard,
[Guest]: to take notes,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: When everyone is playing,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: cricket,
[Guest]: and watching movies,
[Guest]: I study.
[Guest]: And still I get less grades.
[Guest]: And still I know when,
[Guest]: I'll be at the job market.
[Guest]: You know,
[Guest]: no one is going to hire me,
[Guest]: because I can't speak English.
[Guest]: And again,
[Guest]: I thought that,
[Guest]: I am talking to him now as a reporter,
[Guest]: like,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: as a journalist who wants to write a story,
[Guest]: in the campus.
[Guest]: But,
[Guest]: there would be people like him in my batch.
[Guest]: And I was blind to it.
[Guest]: You know,
[Guest]: so,
[Guest]: I'm saying,
[Guest]: you know what I'm trying to say that,
[Guest]: these,
[Guest]: ideas started coming in.
[Guest]: And I think,
[Guest]: that,
[Guest]: that's what I meant when I said,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: it shaped me.
[Guest]: That,
[Guest]: the shaping was happening in two parts.
[Guest]: One was,
[Guest]: thik hai bahar ka kuch nahi pata hai,
[Guest]: but campus toh mujhe samajh aa raha tha.
[Guest]: That there are things that I was not seeing.
[Guest]: And parallelly,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: I was meeting,
[Guest]: and reading about,
[Guest]: all our illustrious alumni.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: Someone is making films,
[Guest]: someone is making movies,
[Guest]: someone has built a unicorn company,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: someone has done this,
[Guest]: brilliant research in the US.
[Guest]: You know,
[Guest]: the fortune 500 CEOs,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: these people would come to campus.
[Guest]: And you just feel boss ki,
[Guest]: if you think,
[Guest]: and you,
[Guest]: you are inspired by them,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: Ki agar inhone kar hai,
[Guest]: and they would come,
[Guest]: they would have chai with you.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: These big people.
[Guest]: And,
[Guest]: they tell you stories from the campus,
[Guest]: which you feel ki yaar,
[Guest]: hamara bhi toh yeh story hai.
[Guest]: So, I think you get that confidence ki,
[Guest]: like they were also idiots like we are.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: Unka bhi aise tha,
[Guest]: toh you know,
[Guest]: kuch bhi kar sakte hain.
[Guest]: So, these things were happening
[Guest]: that gave me a lot of confidence.
[Guest]: And,
[Guest]: that's how IIT shaped me.
[Guest]: I mean,
[Guest]: koi mein keh rahe hoon,
[Guest]: I have spoken a lot,
[Guest]: but I'll stop here.
[Guest]: But I'm saying,
[Guest]: at multiple levels,
[Guest]: both from political consciousness to,
[Guest]: inspiration,
[Guest]: to seeing the traps that I told you about,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: In the beginning,
[Guest]: ki I started seeing traps where,
[Guest]: we were stuck.
[Guest]: So, all of those together,
[Guest]: I think,
[Guest]: at least got me thinking that,
[Guest]: the world is not what it is.
[Guest]: There are layers.
[Guest]: And if you look at them deeply,
[Guest]: you will really understand
[Guest]: what is happening.
[Guest]: And,
[Amit Varma]: what strikes me in all this is that,
[Amit Varma]: we live in a world,
[Amit Varma]: which is full of bubbles,
[Amit Varma]: which is full of preset tracks,
[Amit Varma]: which go a particular way
[Amit Varma]: and don't go anywhere else.
[Amit Varma]: And traps,
[Amit Varma]: as you said.
[Amit Varma]: So, a lot of these people who are in IIT,
[Amit Varma]: IIT karke shayad koi IIM jayega,
[Amit Varma]: consultant banega,
[Amit Varma]: shayad koi abroad jayega,
[Amit Varma]: research karega,
[Amit Varma]: brilliant kaam karega,
[Amit Varma]: shayad koi software engineer karega,
[Amit Varma]: Facebook mein jayega.
[Amit Varma]: And these are different tracks.
[Amit Varma]: And you're all in your bubble
[Amit Varma]: and you're not looking out.
[Amit Varma]: And you said that,
[Amit Varma]: and they're not looking out.
[Amit Varma]: one of course,
[Amit Varma]: you avoided these tracks
[Amit Varma]: by saying things like,
[Amit Varma]: ki theek hai main placement mein nahi jaunga,
[Amit Varma]: main wo game nahi khelunga,
[Amit Varma]: main apna kaam karunga.
[Amit Varma]: And you're also looking outside the bubble
[Amit Varma]: and looking kind of beyond these layers.
[Amit Varma]: And I realized while growing up also,
[Amit Varma]: when I kind of,
[Amit Varma]: kind of map my own sort of journey,
[Amit Varma]: it's very clear
[Amit Varma]: that there are all these layers
[Amit Varma]: which make you blind
[Amit Varma]: to different aspects of the world.
[Amit Varma]: And then at different point,
[Amit Varma]: these layers kind of start falling away.
[Amit Varma]: So my first question arising from this is that,
[Amit Varma]: do you think that
[Amit Varma]: it's not just a question of IIT changing you?
[Amit Varma]: It is also a question of you
[Amit Varma]: being the kind of person inherently
[Amit Varma]: who would be changed by IIT.
[Amit Varma]: Kyuki the experiences you went through
[Amit Varma]: would be common to everyone.
[Amit Varma]: Campus toh same hai.
[Amit Varma]: You know, jo ho raha hai, same hai.
[Amit Varma]: But your nazariya is different.
[Amit Varma]: You are, you know,
[Amit Varma]: you're pursuing different things.
[Amit Varma]: And from that,
[Amit Varma]: different chains of events happen,
[Amit Varma]: which, you know,
[Amit Varma]: lead you to change in the ways that you say.
[Amit Varma]: So what I'm trying to say is that
[Amit Varma]: it's a two-way process, you know.
[Amit Varma]: It's not just that the right things happened,
[Amit Varma]: but you were also the right person
[Amit Varma]: for them to happen too.
[Amit Varma]: While for somebody else,
[Amit Varma]: you know,
[Amit Varma]: for them,
[Amit Varma]: whatever track they took was the right track
[Amit Varma]: that they went down on.
[Amit Varma]: So when you look at yourself,
[Amit Varma]: do you, like earlier,
[Amit Varma]: before we started recording,
[Amit Varma]: you were speaking about
[Amit Varma]: how you developed this ethical sense
[Amit Varma]: right from the time that you were in school.
[Amit Varma]: So do you think there was something there,
[Amit Varma]: something fundamental about you
[Amit Varma]: that made you open to this change?
[Amit Varma]: And if so,
[Amit Varma]: where did it come from,
[Amit Varma]: this sense of injustice
[Amit Varma]: or the sense of trying to be a change agent?
[Amit Varma]: You know, did it also,
[Amit Varma]: and can you elaborate on what you had meant earlier
[Amit Varma]: while talking about the ethical aspect of it?
[Unknown]: And you've kind of spoken about that
[Amit Varma]: a little bit here also,
[Amit Varma]: you know, just sort of,
[Amit Varma]: I want to understand the sense of
[Amit Varma]: how you were shaped
[Amit Varma]: and where you were coming from.
[Guest]: Yeah, I'll tell you,
[Guest]: but, you know, I just want to add something,
[Guest]: you know, I just get so passionate about my institute
[Guest]: because, you know,
[Guest]: I'm like one of the worst critics of IIT,
[Guest]: but also one of the champions
[Guest]: because I really think that institute has potential.
[Guest]: And one of the things that I'm hating
[Guest]: at the moment as I talk,
[Guest]: I'm just speaking out loud,
[Guest]: is that I just feel if I am painting some,
[Guest]: you know, my institute in some broad brushstrokes
[Guest]: as if, you know,
[Guest]: you know, I am different
[Guest]: and, you know, everyone is this,
[Amit Varma]: but, you know, everyone has multitudes.
[Amit Varma]: I think sometimes deep criticism
[Amit Varma]: can come out of deep love.
[Guest]: That's where the frustration comes from.
[Guest]: It is, you know, I think I heard this quote from,
[Guest]: what's the last lecture?
[Guest]: Who's the professor?
[Guest]: Have you seen?
[Amit Varma]: Rosh? Randy Rosh?
[Unknown]: Something like that.
[Guest]: He said something like that,
[Guest]: you know, if the exact words are not right,
[Guest]: but something like that,
[Guest]: if you're doing something wrong
[Guest]: and no one is telling you,
[Guest]: that means they have given up on you,
[Guest]: you know, something like that.
[Guest]: So I would never give up on my institute.
[Guest]: And I still like,
[Guest]: I think we are going on a very downward trajectory
[Guest]: given the political environment of the country
[Guest]: is affecting us, right?
[Guest]: I was in the center
[Guest]: when the CA and RC protests were happening.
[Guest]: Something had happened at IIT Kanpur
[Guest]: and I made it just blew my mind
[Guest]: about how propaganda works.
[Guest]: So I could see what is happening at my campus,
[Guest]: but I still,
[Guest]: you know, my friends,
[Guest]: like some of my deepest friendships are from IIT,
[Guest]: you know, and I'll always be grateful,
[Guest]: but I'm just saying that I just feel a bit,
[Guest]: because I'm, you know, speaking,
[Guest]: I'm not writing a piece where I could,
[Guest]: you know, I could have all sorts of caveats.
[Guest]: It's just one-on-one conversation.
[Guest]: So I just wanted to put that out that,
[Guest]: yeah, I don't want to make,
[Guest]: and I also feel honestly uncomfortable
[Guest]: when I talk about my experience
[Guest]: and if it sounds like,
[Guest]: oh, I am different
[Guest]: because that, it just makes me uncomfortable
[Guest]: for reasons I don't know.
[Amit Varma]: No, and I'll tell you something,
[Amit Varma]: just thinking aloud,
[Amit Varma]: that what you're saying about IIT,
[Amit Varma]: I feel the same way about India.
[Amit Varma]: You know, I will criticize,
[Amit Varma]: I will keep doing it,
[Amit Varma]: I will dissent, I will protest,
[Amit Varma]: but I'm doing it because bloody hell,
[Amit Varma]: I love this country and I want it to change, right?
[Amit Varma]: That's where we're coming from, right?
[Guest]: And what the funny thing Amit is that,
[Guest]: I used to be in IIT,
[Guest]: I used to sit on campus,
[Guest]: I mean, I'm saying,
[Guest]: I'm saying, I'm saying,
[Guest]: but when someone outside,
[Guest]: you know, the campus,
[Guest]: criticizes,
[Unknown]: right?
[Guest]: So I've never,
[Guest]: I think I don't think it that way,
[Guest]: but you know,
[Guest]: when you're inside the system,
[Guest]: because like,
[Guest]: I'll talk about how I got there,
[Guest]: when I was still at a semester left,
[Guest]: someone at the Hindu,
[Guest]: I went to this person,
[Guest]: to ask for some advice,
[Guest]: and he said it was something about Kashmir,
[Guest]: that I wanted,
[Guest]: I said I don't know anything,
[Guest]: I'm this ignorant person who has no idea,
[Guest]: can you tell me,
[Guest]: I want to read,
[Guest]: I want to understand,
[Guest]: because I don't know,
[Guest]: so he told me something,
[Guest]: and he made a snarky comment saying,
[Guest]: they don't teach this in your IIT,
[Guest]: so I was like,
[Guest]: they teach you so much in IIT,
[Guest]: that you should at least ask questions,
[Guest]: I mean, my professors have taught me so much,
[Guest]: that I'm asking you,
[Guest]: now okay,
[Guest]: I don't know enough about politics,
[Guest]: I don't know,
[Guest]: I didn't have consciousness at that time,
[Guest]: so that I,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: it happens,
[Guest]: when,
[Guest]: which is why I was telling you,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: you talk a lot about gentleman amnesia,
[Guest]: right,
[Guest]: in the effect that,
[Guest]: you read something in the papers,
[Unknown]: and it doesn't hit,
[Guest]: so it happens a lot with me in IIT,
[Guest]: you have reduced,
[Guest]: most IIT people,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: one story comes every year,
[Guest]: one crore package is applied,
[Guest]: right,
[Guest]: and then you say,
[Guest]: kids are like this,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: people take jobs in banks,
[Guest]: and you say,
[Guest]: these are greedy people,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: why are they going to the bank after doing engineering,
[Guest]: I'm like,
[Guest]: boss,
[Guest]: do you know,
[Guest]: how placement happens,
[Guest]: what,
[Guest]: like,
[Guest]: if someone comes,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: a reporter,
[Guest]: should spend 10 days at an IIT campus,
[Guest]: when placements are happening,
[Guest]: and then they will know,
[Guest]: like,
[Guest]: what actually happens inside the campus,
[Guest]: don't make,
[Guest]: these blanking narratives around,
[Guest]: career choices people make,
[Guest]: right,
[Guest]: so I'm saying that,
[Guest]: I just told you that,
[Guest]: as is the,
[Guest]: I think the theme of your show,
[Guest]: people have multitudes,
[Guest]: but,
[Guest]: I am just describing,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: as a one person observer,
[Guest]: so not to be generalized,
[Guest]: that's the thing,
[Guest]: so ethics,
[Guest]: when I was in grade two,
[Guest]: I remember,
[Guest]: like,
[Guest]: this is vivid memory in my head,
[Guest]: I don't know why this stuck,
[Guest]: where see,
[Guest]: grade two,
[Guest]: I just wanted to be the class topper,
[Guest]: and there was this girl,
[Guest]: who,
[Guest]: for four years,
[Guest]: she would come first,
[Guest]: I would come second,
[Guest]: so I was like,
[Guest]: what am I doing,
[Guest]: why can't I come first,
[Guest]: so one day,
[Guest]: I was in an English exam,
[Guest]: and the spelling was something like,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: like,
[Guest]: there,
[Guest]: and there,
[Guest]: where,
[Guest]: so I got a little confused,
[Guest]: and I did not know the right answer,
[Guest]: by mistake,
[Guest]: I just saw,
[Guest]: the person sitting in front of me,
[Guest]: what they had written,
[Guest]: and I knew they would get it right,
[Guest]: and my spelling was wrong,
[Guest]: and I felt so guilty,
[Guest]: that how could I look at,
[Guest]: this person's answer sheet,
[Guest]: and I am wrong too,
[Guest]: and I also wanted to be first,
[Guest]: in the class,
[Guest]: right,
[Guest]: I didn't change the answer,
[Guest]: okay,
[Guest]: and I,
[Guest]: missed,
[Guest]: getting on,
[Guest]: it sounds so stupid in retrospection,
[Guest]: but,
[Guest]: I missed getting,
[Guest]: the top position in the class,
[Unknown]: by that one mark,
[Unknown]: but no,
[Unknown]: that year,
[Guest]: I felt,
[Guest]: I didn't feel bad,
[Guest]: because,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: it's like,
[Guest]: I did the right thing,
[Guest]: ethics,
[Guest]: in fourth grade,
[Guest]: my class teacher,
[Guest]: in the GK exam time,
[Guest]: I think there was a change,
[Guest]: in defense minister,
[Guest]: so I knew the old guy,
[Guest]: I think with Jaswant Singh,
[Guest]: 2000,
[Guest]: I don't know when it happened,
[Guest]: I think,
[Guest]: there was a change,
[Guest]: so I knew the old guy,
[Guest]: my class teacher calls me,
[Guest]: and,
[Guest]: very quietly tells me,
[Guest]: who is the,
[Guest]: what have you written,
[Guest]: in your answer sheet,
[Guest]: who is the defense minister,
[Guest]: I said, ma'am this,
[Guest]: he said, no,
[Guest]: the defense minister,
[Guest]: changed yesterday,
[Guest]: write this answer,
[Guest]: okay,
[Guest]: and Amit,
[Guest]: I felt so,
[Guest]: uncomfortable,
[Guest]: that,
[Guest]: in the class of 40,
[Guest]: why am I being favored,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: I mean,
[Guest]: like,
[Guest]: why are you telling me the answer,
[Guest]: and I also could not,
[Guest]: disrespect her,
[Guest]: by not,
[Guest]: changing the answer,
[Guest]: right,
[Amit Varma]: I think there was a,
[Amit Varma]: Jaswant Singh,
[Amit Varma]: Yashwant Sinha swap,
[Guest]: in those years,
[Guest]: something happened,
[Guest]: I don't know,
[Guest]: defense minister,
[Guest]: my teacher told me the answer,
[Guest]: and I felt so bad,
[Guest]: because,
[Guest]: like,
[Guest]: why are you,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: so this whole,
[Guest]: that's what I'm saying that,
[Guest]: this sense of,
[Guest]: right and wrong,
[Guest]: especially when I am involved,
[Guest]: right,
[Guest]: that I am being favored,
[Guest]: that just felt so deeply,
[Guest]: wrong,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: things are,
[Guest]: don't,
[Guest]: give me the,
[Guest]: explicit privilege,
[Guest]: and this kept happening,
[Guest]: I can like,
[Guest]: I can keep telling you stories,
[Guest]: that happened in school,
[Guest]: and this happened in IIT,
[Guest]: and,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: like,
[Guest]: cheating is happening,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: things are happening,
[Guest]: people are,
[Guest]: people,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: it's a very standard technique,
[Guest]: across the globe,
[Guest]: where you,
[Guest]: in your resume,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: the resume you create,
[Guest]: it's never a true reflection of yourself,
[Guest]: right,
[Guest]: you,
[Guest]: if you know x,
[Guest]: you will show 10x,
[Guest]: and,
[Guest]: I was like,
[Guest]: you are lying,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: I didn't,
[Guest]: I mean,
[Guest]: see again,
[Guest]: these are very moralistic judgments,
[Guest]: like, who am I to tell anyone,
[Guest]: what they have to do,
[Guest]: but,
[Guest]: I am saying,
[Guest]: this is what I was feeling,
[Guest]: so,
[Guest]: I had this resume,
[Guest]: which was,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: orange color,
[Guest]: green color,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: the font was some,
[Guest]: maroon,
[Guest]: something,
[Guest]: and,
[Guest]: it,
[Guest]: I didn't change it till the final year,
[Guest]: I said,
[Guest]: okay,
[Guest]: you make it,
[Guest]: you make these nice resumes,
[Guest]: I hated the idea of a resume,
[Guest]: because I said,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: this document is a lie,
[Guest]: you are selling,
[Amit Varma]: you are doing marketing,
[Amit Varma]: Those days have Instagram,
[Guest]: yeah,
[Guest]: I think they still do it,
[Guest]: right,
[Guest]: so like,
[Guest]: resume, so I just felt that,
[Guest]: after that,
[Guest]: I used to help people,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: I was like,
[Guest]: you are in this position where,
[Guest]: because these are friends,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: I mean,
[Guest]: they are,
[Guest]: they are my friends,
[Guest]: and the people I care about,
[Guest]: so,
[Guest]: I have that discomfort as well,
[Guest]: but,
[Guest]: I also know that,
[Guest]: yeah,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: this guy needs to,
[Guest]: he needs to get a loan,
[Guest]: he needs a job,
[Guest]: so,
[Guest]: we will help him,
[Guest]: that is also going on,
[Guest]: so,
[Guest]: I am saying,
[Guest]: all of these things are happening,
[Guest]: and this professor,
[Guest]: I was telling you about,
[Guest]: he was my,
[Guest]: like,
[Guest]: he,
[Guest]: okay, if people like him exist in this campus,
[Guest]: because,
[Guest]: when he taught us programming,
[Guest]: he came one day and said in class that,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: for,
[Guest]: after like,
[Guest]: six programming assignments,
[Guest]: whoever has cheated,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: come and tell me,
[Guest]: I will give you one grade less,
[Guest]: if you don't tell me,
[Guest]: okay,
[Guest]: and I catch you,
[Guest]: you have,
[Guest]: you get an F grade,
[Guest]: so,
[Guest]: he,
[Guest]: ethical problem,
[Amit Varma]: what should we do now?
[Guest]: This is a good game theory situation.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: That's why I love him,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: he played this game after,
[Guest]: and it was such a scandal at campus,
[Guest]: people were afraid,
[Guest]: because maximum people had done it,
[Guest]: what should we do now?
[Guest]: So, people started hating him,
[Guest]: what kind of a professor he is,
[Guest]: this and that,
[Guest]: and I used to have long private chats with him,
[Guest]: so many things happened,
[Guest]: sir, you tell me about this,
[Guest]: and he used to give me unfiltered access to,
[Guest]: inside story of the administration,
[Guest]: that this is like this,
[Guest]: and it was super critical,
[Guest]: he is one of those people,
[Guest]: which I told you that,
[Guest]: he felt for the institute,
[Guest]: he would not give up,
[Guest]: now he has kind of given up,
[Guest]: but that was there,
[Guest]: so he was my moral compass,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: he then took a job at another university,
[Guest]: I asked him why he was going,
[Guest]: so he told me the reasons,
[Guest]: and he said,
[Guest]: one factor to pick a job was,
[Guest]: I will head the ethics committee of any institute I go,
[Guest]: if you don't give me that,
[Guest]: I don't want to come to your institute,
[Guest]: so I was so inspired that,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: people,
[Guest]: because at that age,
[Guest]: you are told that you are an idealist,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: this is not how the world works,
[Guest]: you are naive,
[Guest]: and I'm like,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: look at this guy,
[Guest]: he has all the accomplishments,
[Guest]: he studied at this college,
[Guest]: went for a US PhD,
[Guest]: he's teaching here,
[Guest]: and if he can stand for ethics,
[Guest]: to like who,
[Guest]: like,
[Guest]: you should stand for ethics,
[Guest]: so I'm saying,
[Guest]: so I was so glad that you had some compass,
[Guest]: about kind of things that are happening,
[Guest]: and that is what about I think ethics,
[Guest]: and that stayed with me,
[Guest]: the current thing is that,
[Guest]: I'm now in a different phase,
[Guest]: where I started questioning,
[Guest]: which is why,
[Guest]: one of my current personal projects,
[Guest]: is to go deep into moral psychology,
[Guest]: and moral philosophy,
[Guest]: because you know,
[Guest]: then you start understanding,
[Guest]: like,
[Guest]: why am I like this,
[Guest]: why do I believe this is right,
[Guest]: this is wrong,
[Guest]: what do I believe,
[Guest]: is that rational,
[Guest]: is it not rational,
[Guest]: but I'm saying that time,
[Guest]: I was living it,
[Guest]: now I'm just thinking about it.
[Amit Varma]: Earlier,
[Amit Varma]: you'd mentioned Dawkins and Pinker,
[Amit Varma]: and I remember when I went into the rabbit hole,
[Amit Varma]: of evolutionary psychology,
[Amit Varma]: and so on,
[Amit Varma]: one book that I enjoyed reading,
[Amit Varma]: was a moral animal by Robert Wright,
[Amit Varma]: and where he talks about,
[Amit Varma]: the evolution of morality,
[Amit Varma]: from an evolutionary psychology perspective,
[Amit Varma]: which was super interesting,
[Amit Varma]: in which I'll recommend,
[Amit Varma]: but what you know,
[Amit Varma]: but one of the things you kind of realize,
[Amit Varma]: is that we are hardwired,
[Amit Varma]: in different contradictory ways,
[Amit Varma]: through different processes,
[Amit Varma]: for different reasons,
[Amit Varma]: so we are hardwired of course,
[Amit Varma]: to be selfish,
[Amit Varma]: but we are also hardwired for altruism,
[Amit Varma]: and all these things exist together,
[Amit Varma]: and I love this phrase of Pinker,
[Amit Varma]: where he's talking about,
[Amit Varma]: nature and nurture,
[Amit Varma]: how the two work together,
[Amit Varma]: and he says,
[Amit Varma]: nature gives you knobs,
[Amit Varma]: nurture turns them,
[Unknown]: and I found that very resonant,
[Amit Varma]: right,
[Amit Varma]: that there might be some knobs,
[Amit Varma]: which are huge in you,
[Amit Varma]: but nurture doesn't turn,
[Unknown]: and there might be some knobs,
[Amit Varma]: which are like medium knobs,
[Amit Varma]: and nurture turns them or not,
[Unknown]: and that's kind of amplified,
[Amit Varma]: so just on that question,
[Amit Varma]: I kind of wonder,
[Amit Varma]: because you know,
[Amit Varma]: and that's a question,
[Amit Varma]: I often ask myself as well,
[Amit Varma]: that you know,
[Unknown]: how do we live our lives,
[Amit Varma]: it's a central question,
[Amit Varma]: ki meri kya hai,
[Amit Varma]: you know,
[Amit Varma]: initially you can,
[Amit Varma]: get your sense of morality,
[Amit Varma]: from whatever the conventional way of thinking,
[Amit Varma]: might be in your family,
[Amit Varma]: or your small community,
[Amit Varma]: or whatever,
[Amit Varma]: you know,
[Amit Varma]: and later on,
[Amit Varma]: you can modify it as you read more,
[Amit Varma]: sometimes you can rely on your instincts,
[Amit Varma]: as you did when you saw that wrong spelling,
[Unknown]: and you didn't change your spelling,
[Unknown]: right,
[Unknown]: you know,
[Amit Varma]: where you're relying on an instinct,
[Amit Varma]: and Wright's argument would be,
[Amit Varma]: you're hardwired for that,
[Amit Varma]: hmm, you are also hardwired to want to be first,
[Amit Varma]: right,
[Amit Varma]: but you know,
[Unknown]: one overlap,
[Unknown]: yeah,
[Unknown]: this one,
[Unknown]: one over,
[Unknown]: and somebody else,
[Amit Varma]: something else,
[Amit Varma]: may kind of win over,
[Amit Varma]: so that's something I think about,
[Amit Varma]: because it is very clear,
[Amit Varma]: that some people have a greater urge,
[Amit Varma]: to be changemakers,
[Amit Varma]: and some people have a greater urge,
[Amit Varma]: to fight for fairness,
[Amit Varma]: and I think there are two sides of that coin also,
[Amit Varma]: yeah,
[Amit Varma]: because you're,
[Amit Varma]: you know,
[Amit Varma]: a lot of the moralizing that people do,
[Amit Varma]: can sometimes be driven by self-aggrandizement,
[Amit Varma]: they are posturing to themselves,
[Amit Varma]: they're performing,
[Amit Varma]: as you would say,
[Amit Varma]: but at the same time,
[Amit Varma]: in many cases,
[Amit Varma]: it's genuine,
[Amit Varma]: like I'm thinking of that incident,
[Amit Varma]: when you didn't change the spelling,
[Amit Varma]: you were not performing for anybody,
[Amit Varma]: right,
[Amit Varma]: there's nobody,
[Amit Varma]: there's nothing,
[Amit Varma]: you know,
[Amit Varma]: you could just have changed it,
[Amit Varma]: and you didn't,
[Amit Varma]: and that's also sort of there,
[Amit Varma]: and I would imagine at some level,
[Amit Varma]: like,
[Amit Varma]: do you feel that at some level,
[Amit Varma]: that ethical sense alone,
[Amit Varma]: forget the intellectual understanding,
[Amit Varma]: of the different games,
[Unknown]: that are being played at IIT,
[Unknown]: or journalism,
[Unknown]: or all those different professions,
[Amit Varma]: but did that ethical compass,
[Amit Varma]: also have something to do,
[Amit Varma]: with your being willing,
[Amit Varma]: to turn your back on,
[Amit Varma]: the conventional way of doing things,
[Amit Varma]: and say,
[Amit Varma]: I'll go to the hills.
[Guest]: So I've thought about it Amit,
[Guest]: and I don't know the answer,
[Guest]: because again,
[Guest]: I was telling you when I was saying,
[Guest]: this,
[Guest]: because see,
[Guest]: ultimately when you say,
[Guest]: convention,
[Guest]: non-convention,
[Guest]: I want to say two things,
[Guest]: first of all,
[Guest]: this whole idea of convention,
[Guest]: that just feels a bit weird.
[Guest]: So I was listening to Noam Chomsky,
[Guest]: in a podcast,
[Guest]: and he gave this frame that,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: when you go to a school,
[Guest]: college,
[Guest]: right,
[Guest]: he says,
[Guest]: like,
[Guest]: this is Chomsky's theory,
[Guest]: I don't know,
[Guest]: I've not read,
[Guest]: apart from what he says,
[Guest]: he says that,
[Guest]: the fundamental human desire,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: like,
[Guest]: our instinct is freedom.
[Guest]: Okay,
[Guest]: humans want freedom,
[Guest]: that's our ultimate quest.
[Guest]: But the society is structured in a way,
[Guest]: to suck that,
[Guest]: willingness of freedom out of you.
[Guest]: And your education,
[Guest]: universities,
[Guest]: your workplaces,
[Guest]: they school you into believing that,
[Guest]: you can't,
[Guest]: like,
[Guest]: like they,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: take out the idea of freedom from you.
[Guest]: Now,
[Guest]: then you can ask,
[Guest]: what is freedom?
[Guest]: I think there is no,
[Guest]: freedom in my head,
[Guest]: like,
[Guest]: you can't define it,
[Guest]: it's,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: freedom is freedom,
[Guest]: it's human freedom.
[Guest]: Now,
[Guest]: you,
[Guest]: you think you are free,
[Guest]: but you know,
[Guest]: as I say,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: there's some,
[Guest]: some trap in which you are,
[Guest]: so you can't see it.
[Guest]: So it's a very complicated,
[Guest]: philosophical,
[Guest]: rabbit hole in itself.
[Guest]: But I'm saying that Chomsky,
[Guest]: when he gave this framework that,
[Guest]: we are,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: we want to be free,
[Guest]: but society,
[Guest]: structures,
[Guest]: school us not to be free.
[Guest]: And then he says that,
[Guest]: you look at it from this frame,
[Guest]: and then you think,
[Guest]: about the notion of a career.
[Guest]: He says that,
[Guest]: I think something a hundred year old,
[Guest]: or two hundred year old idea.
[Guest]: It didn't exist,
[Guest]: 500 years ago,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: So,
[Guest]: all I'm trying to say is that,
[Guest]: if you,
[Guest]: when I think about,
[Guest]: human society,
[Guest]: not at a,
[Guest]: five year scale,
[Guest]: or a 10 year scale,
[Guest]: but you expand,
[Guest]: your,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: you,
[Guest]: talk in centuries or stuff.
[Guest]: In that frame,
[Guest]: you think what is normal?
[Guest]: Then I just feel like,
[Guest]: what, like,
[Guest]: what is the meaning of convention?
[Guest]: You know what I'm trying to say?
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, yeah.
[Amit Varma]: Sample size,
[Amit Varma]: if you change it,
[Guest]: everything looks different.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: Everything,
[Guest]: everything feels different.
[Guest]: Okay,
[Guest]: now I'm not looking at,
[Guest]: okay,
[Guest]: what happened post liberalization India.
[Guest]: Okay?
[Guest]: You're not talking about India.
[Guest]: You're talking about,
[Guest]: human society.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: So I'm saying,
[Guest]: when I see that frame,
[Guest]: and anyone tells me that,
[Guest]: like,
[Guest]: this question about convention,
[Guest]: non-convention,
[Guest]: that's why I'm saying,
[Guest]: it just feels,
[Guest]: weird to me,
[Guest]: that I don't know,
[Guest]: that,
[Guest]: how to even,
[Guest]: approach this question,
[Guest]: because,
[Guest]: I was telling recently to a friend,
[Guest]: I met,
[Guest]: her after a long while,
[Guest]: and she said,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: you have done things differently.
[Guest]: And I told her that,
[Guest]: please don't say this.
[Guest]: This just,
[Guest]: irritates me in a way,
[Guest]: I can't explain.
[Guest]: Because,
[Guest]: yeah,
[Guest]: like,
[Guest]: like why,
[Guest]: I just feel that,
[Guest]: like,
[Guest]: you're just an ordinary human being,
[Guest]: trying to do things.
[Guest]: Then,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: it's just that tension.
[Guest]: So I don't know.
[Guest]: The only thing I would say,
[Guest]: is that,
[Guest]: the,
[Guest]: element of risk taking,
[Guest]: despite I think,
[Guest]: I have a solid cushion.
[Guest]: Like sometimes Amit,
[Guest]: I feel that,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: my worst case scenario,
[Guest]: would be the dream for most Indians.
[Guest]: Like,
[Guest]: if I say,
[Guest]: I fail as a writer,
[Guest]: I fail as a journalist,
[Guest]: then what will happen?
[Guest]: I will have to go to Bangalore,
[Guest]: in a big tech company,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: and do a high paying job.
[Guest]: How sad, right?
[Guest]: Poor guy,
[Guest]: that you know,
[Guest]: could not.
[Guest]: So I'm saying,
[Guest]: it's not risky.
[Guest]: So,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: that's what I'm trying to say,
[Guest]: that what convention did you break,
[Guest]: when you have such a solid cushion.
[Guest]: But,
[Guest]: that element of that thing that,
[Guest]: I can take a risk,
[Guest]: that,
[Guest]: it goes back.
[Guest]: Like,
[Guest]: when I was sitting in IIT exam,
[Guest]: and this I forgot,
[Guest]: junior of mine reminded me,
[Guest]: that in our time,
[Guest]: in 2011,
[Guest]: you had IIT,
[Guest]: you had AIEE exam,
[Guest]: and you didn't even get BITS.
[Guest]: What is this,
[Guest]: three days?
[Guest]: I, Amit,
[Guest]: only sat for one exam.
[Guest]: I said,
[Guest]: AIEE,
[Guest]: I won't give BITS.
[Guest]: If I don't get into IIT,
[Guest]: I won't do engineering.
[Guest]: Now in retrospect,
[Guest]: with now my,
[Guest]: frame of probability theory,
[Guest]: it was a stupid decision.
[Guest]: Like,
[Guest]: you don't have to study,
[Guest]: anything extra.
[Guest]: You have to go and sit.
[Guest]: But,
[Guest]: that thing was that,
[Guest]: no,
[Guest]: I will,
[Guest]: like,
[Guest]: if what happens,
[Guest]: if those in six hours,
[Guest]: I fuck up.
[Guest]: So,
[Guest]: I was like,
[Guest]: it doesn't matter,
[Guest]: we'll just,
[Guest]: play the,
[Guest]: that one game.
[Guest]: That's what we have to do.
[Guest]: That,
[Guest]: which is when,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: placements came that,
[Guest]: let's leave it.
[Guest]: It's not that,
[Guest]: that,
[Guest]: fill it up.
[Guest]: Our,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: if a good company comes,
[Guest]: then sit.
[Guest]: No,
[Guest]: it will not apply.
[Guest]: So,
[Guest]: I think that,
[Guest]: ability to,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: just think that,
[Guest]: I told you right,
[Guest]: I'll be in the segment,
[Guest]: that I'm not witty.
[Guest]: I'm not funny as a person.
[Guest]: After knowing that about myself,
[Guest]: I participated in campus.
[Guest]: We have this event called,
[Guest]: Mridaksh,
[Guest]: at IIT.
[Guest]: It's a festival thing.
[Guest]: It's like,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: to give an idea to other people.
[Guest]: It's like,
[Guest]: it feels like Rudi's,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: the audience gets,
[Guest]: their fun,
[Guest]: when people are embarrassed on stage.
[Guest]: And they have to outwit the,
[Guest]: host.
[Guest]: That's the setup.
[Guest]: You dance,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: talent,
[Guest]: question.
[Guest]: I have zero talent in all of that.
[Guest]: After that,
[Guest]: I registered.
[Guest]: In front of like,
[Guest]: this packed auditorium,
[Guest]: I embarrassed myself.
[Guest]: I knew that was going to happen because,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: that is not,
[Guest]: that's not my strength.
[Guest]: I'm a specs wearing nerd.
[Guest]: Not that,
[Guest]: I can entertain people on stage.
[Guest]: My friends had a ball.
[Guest]: Because they were like,
[Guest]: like, they had a lot of fun.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: All of this happened.
[Guest]: I went and,
[Guest]: what I did,
[Guest]: I was very embarrassed.
[Guest]: I wrote a blog on it.
[Guest]: You know,
[Guest]: it's fine.
[Guest]: But that thing stated,
[Guest]: how can I be embarrassed?
[Guest]: You know,
[Guest]: then in the fourth year,
[Guest]: I did that again.
[Guest]: I was like,
[Guest]: I was embarrassed.
[Guest]: But I will do it again.
[Guest]: And this time,
[Guest]: I didn't tell any of my friends.
[Guest]: I went and applied.
[Guest]: And the date was closed.
[Guest]: I was like,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: this time also,
[Guest]: they have shortlisted me.
[Guest]: So they were very happy.
[Guest]: That,
[Guest]: now,
[Guest]: this time also it will be fun.
[Guest]: And I'm like,
[Guest]: you know what?
[Guest]: This time,
[Guest]: I actually,
[Guest]: so there were multiple rounds.
[Guest]: This one is the campus round.
[Guest]: And then you compete with other colleges.
[Guest]: For the first time,
[Guest]: I was embarrassed in stage one.
[Guest]: This time,
[Guest]: I got through the first round.
[Guest]: Even when I'm saying that,
[Guest]: that's not me.
[Guest]: So,
[Guest]: this sense of that embarrassment,
[Guest]: gambling,
[Guest]: that has been a threat.
[Guest]: Now,
[Guest]: I have no,
[Guest]: now in this,
[Guest]: there's no worst case scenario.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: Worst case scenario is,
[Guest]: the next day you go to class,
[Guest]: people will laugh.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: So,
[Guest]: I was so glad,
[Guest]: I,
[Guest]: I don't know anyone else in my campus,
[Guest]: who would have been on that stage four times.
[Guest]: Once before,
[Guest]: after that,
[Guest]: in the final,
[Guest]: you have to do it three times,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: whatever,
[Guest]: whatever.
[Amit Varma]: So,
[Amit Varma]: Did you win?
[Guest]: I went,
[Guest]: I qualified my campus round.
[Guest]: After that,
[Guest]: there's another prelims at the college level.
[Guest]: I mean,
[Guest]: other colleges,
[Guest]: that also I qualified.
[Guest]: Oh wow.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: After that,
[Guest]: in the final,
[Guest]: no,
[Guest]: six,
[Guest]: there's a six,
[Guest]: that I didn't.
[Guest]: One of my friends was like,
[Guest]: damn funny.
[Guest]: And like,
[Guest]: he's doing screenwriting now,
[Guest]: I think.
[Guest]: So, he won.
[Guest]: He was brilliant.
[Guest]: Like,
[Guest]: even after losing,
[Guest]: I felt good that,
[Guest]: yes,
[Guest]: you deserve it.
[Guest]: But I just wanted that stage,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: that in the second year,
[Guest]: like,
[Guest]: how did that happen?
[Guest]: So,
[Guest]: this,
[Guest]: so,
[Guest]: that's what I'm saying that this,
[Guest]: gambling,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: when you said convention,
[Guest]: I don't know convention.
[Guest]: I just feel that,
[Guest]: this thing of,
[Guest]: that we will gamble.
[Guest]: That has been a constant.
[Guest]: Now,
[Guest]: I don't know where that comes from.
[Amit Varma]: Let me contextualize what I,
[Amit Varma]: let me take that forward
[Amit Varma]: and contextualize it
[Amit Varma]: in terms of journalism.
[Amit Varma]: Yes.
[Amit Varma]: That,
[Amit Varma]: in pretty much all professions
[Amit Varma]: and in pretty much life,
[Amit Varma]: most people get into these grooves
[Amit Varma]: and they go along these grooves.
[Amit Varma]: And that's a game that is being played.
[Amit Varma]: And in journalism also,
[Amit Varma]: I see that,
[Amit Varma]: there are different kinds of frames
[Amit Varma]: that you can bring to it.
[Amit Varma]: You can become a journalist
[Amit Varma]: and say that,
[Unknown]: this is a career.
[Unknown]: Hmm.
[Unknown]: Okay,
[Amit Varma]: I will do a career.
[Amit Varma]: I need these skills in my career.
[Amit Varma]: Either I'm good at it
[Amit Varma]: or I like it
[Amit Varma]: or both and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: And you say,
[Amit Varma]: okay, I will perform in my career.
[Amit Varma]: I will excel.
[Amit Varma]: And you enter that groove.
[Amit Varma]: And that is what animates you.
[Amit Varma]: And those are the incentives at play.
[Amit Varma]: And they're conventional incentives.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: That's one,
[Amit Varma]: as an individual,
[Amit Varma]: that is one sort of path you can take.
[Amit Varma]: And the other path is to say that,
[Amit Varma]: is to go in there
[Amit Varma]: with a different kind of set of values
[Amit Varma]: and a different kind of fire
[Amit Varma]: and say that I want to change.
[Amit Varma]: That journalism is about,
[Amit Varma]: you know,
[Amit Varma]: all the cliches,
[Amit Varma]: truth to power,
[Amit Varma]: comfort the afflicted,
[Amit Varma]: afflict the comforted,
[Amit Varma]: so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: That I want to do this kind of work.
[Amit Varma]: I want to write great stories.
[Amit Varma]: I want to do great investigative journalism.
[Amit Varma]: You're burning with that.
[Amit Varma]: You go in with that.
[Amit Varma]: And that's,
[Amit Varma]: you know,
[Amit Varma]: one set of motivations.
[Amit Varma]: And the incentives are slightly different.
[Unknown]: And the way it plays out is,
[Amit Varma]: if I look at it at the institutional level,
[Amit Varma]: at the institutional level,
[Amit Varma]: for pretty much every big media house,
[Amit Varma]: you have to stay within a particular groove
[Amit Varma]: and not challenge those in power too much.
[Amit Varma]: You're a media house,
[Amit Varma]: you are running a big newspaper,
[Amit Varma]: but you also have a chemical factory.
[Amit Varma]: And that is an incentive.
[Amit Varma]: And if the government raids one person,
[Amit Varma]: then it's like,
[Amit Varma]: you know,
[Amit Varma]: a warning to everyone else.
[Amit Varma]: It has a chilling effect.
[Amit Varma]: So the incentive,
[Amit Varma]: the institutional incentive
[Amit Varma]: for these big institutions
[Amit Varma]: is toe the line,
[Amit Varma]: don't mess around, right?
[Amit Varma]: But there is another kind of set of values in play,
[Amit Varma]: where people are animated by something higher.
[Amit Varma]: They're saying journalism,
[Amit Varma]: you know,
[Amit Varma]: I might be running a company or an enterprise.
[Amit Varma]: Journalism is not about a profit and loss statement.
[Amit Varma]: Ki kuch aur hai.
[Amit Varma]: There is a calling.
[Amit Varma]: There is a higher purpose.
[Amit Varma]: Wo karna hai.
[Amit Varma]: Kuch bhi ho jaye karna hai.
[Amit Varma]: You know,
[Amit Varma]: and what I increasingly see is that
[Amit Varma]: in India,
[Amit Varma]: for very rational reasons,
[Amit Varma]: anybody who has more than a certain amount to lose
[Amit Varma]: is, you know, toeing the line.
[Amit Varma]: But there are, of course,
[Amit Varma]: exceptions who are sort of fighting,
[Amit Varma]: you know,
[Amit Varma]: your Alt News and News Minute
[Unknown]: and all those guys,
[Amit Varma]: you know,
[Amit Varma]: they're standing up there and they're fighting
[Amit Varma]: and they're clearly animated by principle.
[Amit Varma]: Aisa nahi hai ki isme market bara hai
[Amit Varma]: or they're occupying some niche or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: No,
[Amit Varma]: they're animated by principle
[Amit Varma]: and they're doing what they're doing.
[Amit Varma]: So the individuals are animated by principle there,
[Amit Varma]: you know,
[Amit Varma]: and Dhanya Rajendran has a higher purpose
[Amit Varma]: and Rahul Kanwal does not,
[Amit Varma]: right?
[Amit Varma]: Simple as that.
[Amit Varma]: And equally,
[Amit Varma]: an institution like a News Minute
[Amit Varma]: will take those risks
[Amit Varma]: and will take those stories
[Amit Varma]: because they feel that what they are doing
[Amit Varma]: is not just about supply and demand.
[Amit Varma]: You know,
[Amit Varma]: there's a sort of story you want to do
[Amit Varma]: and you're hoping it shapes the demand,
[Amit Varma]: but you're going to do it anyway.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know,
[Amit Varma]: a bigger media house may not be like that.
[Amit Varma]: So what do you feel about this game?
[Amit Varma]: Because I feel,
[Amit Varma]: you know,
[Amit Varma]: uncomfortable standing in judgment
[Amit Varma]: over the bigger media houses
[Amit Varma]: or the journalists doing conventional things,
[Amit Varma]: they have families,
[Amit Varma]: they have children to send to school.
[Amit Varma]: I don't want to stand in judgment over them.
[Amit Varma]: Absolutely.
[Amit Varma]: Even though as an individual,
[Amit Varma]: what I would be drawn to is
[Amit Varma]: being the independent guy who is doing
[Amit Varma]: what he is doing in spite of everything.
[Amit Varma]: So,
[Amit Varma]: and you are in the same sort of thinking as me,
[Amit Varma]: as far as I can make out.
[Amit Varma]: So what is your thinking when you sort of
[Amit Varma]: look at this landscape
[Amit Varma]: and does it make you feel lonely?
[Amit Varma]: Did you ever feel lonely in IIT, for example,
[Amit Varma]: when you were fighting the fights that you were fighting?
[Amit Varma]: You know,
[Amit Varma]: that sense of frustration that
[Amit Varma]: why aren't enough people,
[Amit Varma]: why don't enough people see things the same way as I do?
[Amit Varma]: Even though it's rational for them
[Guest]: and it's understandable.
[Guest]: Yeah. Again, I think,
[Guest]: thank you for bringing it up that
[Guest]: there's no,
[Guest]: I mean,
[Guest]: I'm describing it,
[Guest]: but not from a place of judgment.
[Guest]: It's more descriptive in what you're feeling.
[Guest]: I think there is a difference if
[Guest]: people can appreciate that.
[Guest]: But I don't,
[Guest]: I just remember one incident
[Guest]: where I deeply felt lonely
[Guest]: at IIT and that was toward,
[Guest]: like,
[Guest]: I say that IIT placement office
[Guest]: is the place where engineers are killed.
[Guest]: Okay. The way things happen.
[Guest]: So,
[Guest]: this was one incident,
[Guest]: and you know,
[Guest]: I was helping my friends.
[Guest]: So,
[Guest]: so,
[Guest]: that moment of placement is
[Guest]: full of emotions.
[Guest]: If you want to study human emotions,
[Guest]: go to IIT for 10 days at the time of placement.
[Guest]: You'll see everything there.
[Guest]: From jealousy to ambition to fear,
[Guest]: everything is there.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: There was one,
[Guest]: I won't get into details.
[Guest]: I mean,
[Guest]: then I can keep talking about IIT for the next five hours.
[Guest]: But there was one incident,
[Guest]: which,
[Guest]: it happened and
[Guest]: I just gave up.
[Guest]: I mean, at that time,
[Guest]: Tamasha movie was released.
[Guest]: You know,
[Guest]: Imtiaz Ali's.
[Guest]: And,
[Guest]: let's watch the movie.
[Guest]: And that placement was going on
[Guest]: and we went
[Guest]: to our hall.
[Guest]: Amit, I didn't watch the movie.
[Guest]: I was like,
[Guest]: Tamasha is going on here.
[Guest]: Look, Tamasha is going on in my campus.
[Guest]: That's it.
[Guest]: And that day,
[Guest]: it was
[Guest]: late in the night,
[Guest]: evening,
[Guest]: late evening,
[Guest]: and I went to the campus CCD.
[Guest]: And I sat there alone.
[Guest]: I said,
[Guest]: like,
[Guest]: I could not see what was happening in my hostel.
[Guest]: You know, I saw the smartest kid I knew
[Guest]: running around
[Guest]: for a job.
[Guest]: And I was like,
[Guest]: how is this possible, man?
[Guest]: He, this person is significantly smarter.
[Guest]: For this company,
[Guest]: why is he behaving like this?
[Guest]: You know?
[Guest]: So,
[Guest]: like, I'm just saying,
[Guest]: I'm just describing my
[Guest]: state of mind.
[Guest]: So I went,
[Guest]: I sat there and I
[Guest]: opened Facebook.
[Guest]: There's a senior of mine
[Guest]: whom I met.
[Guest]: She's six, seven years older than me.
[Guest]: But with her,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: I had a heart-to-heart about,
[Guest]: so I messaged her.
[Guest]: And I was like,
[Guest]: explain a little, man.
[Guest]: What was like at your time?
[Guest]: What was it?
[Guest]: This and that.
[Guest]: So all that discussions happened.
[Guest]: So that just gave me comfort
[Guest]: that, you know,
[Guest]: I'm not an idiot.
[Guest]: There are others who have thought about it.
[Guest]: So at some point,
[Guest]: there was this friend of mine.
[Guest]: He's a very hardcore lefty,
[Guest]: anarchist, right?
[Guest]: Principles fellow, you know.
[Guest]: So his point of view is different.
[Guest]: But when I didn't understand,
[Guest]: I would just hang out with him.
[Guest]: Like, what is it?
[Guest]: He used to tell me 10 more things
[Guest]: that I didn't even see.
[Guest]: You know?
[Guest]: So I was like,
[Guest]: no, there are people.
[Guest]: It's just that,
[Guest]: you'll roam around the campus,
[Guest]: you'll see the community.
[Guest]: I am not the only person.
[Guest]: There are other people
[Guest]: thinking about these questions.
[Guest]: It's about finding them,
[Guest]: talking to them.
[Guest]: So at that time,
[Guest]: I think in that way,
[Guest]: at least at the campus level,
[Guest]: I wouldn't say.
[Guest]: I mean, again,
[Guest]: I don't know if the picture
[Guest]: is emerging that
[Guest]: I was always in distress at IIT.
[Guest]: I was very happy.
[Guest]: It's just that
[Guest]: things are happening in parallel
[Guest]: and questions are coming.
[Guest]: So not strictly lonely,
[Guest]: apart from that one moment
[Guest]: when my batch was being placed.
[Guest]: That was a very low time for me.
[Amit Varma]: And in journalism,
[Amit Varma]: what's it, you know,
[Amit Varma]: to kind of extend the question?
[Unknown]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So journalism,
[Guest]: so journalism, I can tell you
[Guest]: instances again.
[Guest]: So let's say the context
[Guest]: now we have spoken.
[Guest]: So I think you have the frame
[Amit Varma]: where I'm coming from.
[Guest]: The frame is clear.
[Guest]: Again, I had no idea
[Guest]: that how mainstream journalism happens.
[Guest]: I had, I didn't know
[Guest]: any journalist before
[Guest]: I became a journalist.
[Guest]: I entered into journalism
[Guest]: by pure chance.
[Guest]: I was never asked
[Guest]: that how a young kid
[Guest]: becomes a journalist.
[Guest]: I'm like, I don't know.
[Guest]: You know,
[Guest]: I was not supposed to be a journalist.
[Guest]: I became a journalist
[Guest]: by totally by accident.
[Guest]: So I didn't know
[Guest]: like what are the norms,
[Guest]: but the first principles,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: truth seeking, you know,
[Guest]: something, something.
[Guest]: So my time at the Hindu was great.
[Guest]: You know, so I started my job
[Guest]: at the Hindu as a reporter,
[Guest]: data reporter.
[Guest]: And then I went to HT
[Guest]: and then I did a six month fellowship
[Guest]: at the Wall Street Journal in New York
[Guest]: in the investigative reporting team.
[Guest]: And by the HT was two years
[Guest]: and after that I left.
[Guest]: I did two months at India today
[Guest]: and then I've been freelance.
[Guest]: So in this HT, Hindu was great.
[Guest]: I was learning the basics of,
[Guest]: you know, ABC of reporting,
[Guest]: trying to understand.
[Guest]: In HT, there was one incident
[Guest]: that I was what?
[Guest]: 24, I think.
[Guest]: 24, yeah, I think 24.
[Guest]: And Amit, it,
[Guest]: first shock,
[Guest]: so I don't know why still people
[Guest]: acknowledge.
[Guest]: Do you know the Bobby Ghosh incident?
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I know the Bobby Ghosh incident
[Guest]: where he had to leave.
[Guest]: So just to put in clearly,
[Guest]: because, you know,
[Guest]: people talk in abstract.
[Guest]: So I know a lot about it.
[Guest]: I can't say in
[Guest]: because people have told me,
[Guest]: but to one line description
[Guest]: for who don't know,
[Guest]: Bobby Ghosh was the editor-in-chief of HT
[Guest]: and he, in theory, he resigned.
[Guest]: In reality, he was asked to leave.
[Guest]: Okay, because the PM of this country,
[Guest]: Mr. Modi didn't want him to stay.
[Guest]: It now I can, you know,
[Guest]: say with authority
[Guest]: without disrespecting
[Guest]: what people have told me in private.
[Amit Varma]: And a similar thing happened
[Amit Varma]: a few years before this
[Amit Varma]: with Chidambaram, who was then FM,
[Amit Varma]: I think, and Raju Nari said to it.
[Guest]: Right, so that's the,
[Guest]: so I'm saying,
[Guest]: let's just keep it as a fact,
[Guest]: because somehow, you know,
[Guest]: people still do he said,
[Guest]: she said on this incident.
[Guest]: So that's, now, you know,
[Guest]: the day this happened
[Guest]: in the newsroom, I,
[Guest]: so I have this habit.
[Guest]: I write long emails to people
[Guest]: like I write to you, right?
[Guest]: Before the show,
[Guest]: I love writing emails.
[Guest]: So I wrote an email to TN Nainan
[Guest]: at Business Standard.
[Guest]: I read his book
[Guest]: and I loved it.
[Guest]: And I said, sir, I want to meet you.
[Guest]: I wrote him an email.
[Guest]: He called me to his office.
[Guest]: I went, had a great chat with him.
[Guest]: I was coming back,
[Guest]: exited the Barakhamba metro
[Guest]: and my friend called me
[Guest]: and she said,
[Guest]: did Nainan offer you a job?
[Guest]: I was like,
[Guest]: why would Nainan offer me a job?
[Guest]: I don't even want to work
[Guest]: at Business Standard.
[Guest]: He said, no, maybe you should look out
[Guest]: because Bobby is going.
[Guest]: And I was, what do you mean?
[Guest]: He said, come to office.
[Guest]: I will tell you.
[Guest]: I go to office
[Guest]: and that mail comes from
[Guest]: Madam Shobhna Bhartia
[Guest]: Shobhna Bhartia that he's resigned.
[Guest]: And then I was in shock
[Guest]: and then people know what has happened.
[Guest]: I was still trying to process.
[Guest]: There were a couple of colleagues
[Guest]: who were looking at each other.
[Guest]: And again, Amit, just to know,
[Guest]: I am 18 years,
[Guest]: 18 months old in journalism.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: Aur uss waqt to
[Guest]: aapko kuch pata hi nahi hai na,
[Guest]: bigger things.
[Guest]: Now I've thought so much about the media.
[Guest]: So, uss waqt to
[Guest]: you are just in a different zone.
[Guest]: You know what affected me
[Guest]: the most that day
[Guest]: in that newsroom?
[Guest]: I have that vivid memory.
[Guest]: Everything that day
[Guest]: in the newsroom was normal.
[Guest]: You know, I would expect
[Guest]: ki agar itna bada
[Guest]: like what was the signal?
[Guest]: The signal was,
[Guest]: at least for me,
[Guest]: that the government is saying,
[Guest]: we can take your editor-in-chief's job.
[Guest]: Who are you as a reporter?
[Guest]: You know, that was the sense I got.
[Guest]: Ki bhai, tumhare boss ki naukri chale gayi,
[Guest]: tum kaun ho?
[Guest]: Stay in line.
[Guest]: It's not an explicit message.
[Guest]: But don't you think people
[Guest]: would imagine that?
[Amit Varma]: Mujhe laga.
[Amit Varma]: I think, in fact,
[Amit Varma]: that questions a very
[Amit Varma]: basis of the job.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: And I was like,
[Guest]: there should be like
[Guest]: a newsroom gathering
[Guest]: where people discuss,
[Guest]: okay, what has happened?
[Guest]: This, like,
[Guest]: what could be the most direct attack
[Guest]: on free press in this country?
[Guest]: Toh aap, you know,
[Guest]: when I go out
[Guest]: and talk to my friends
[Guest]: and they press freedom ki baat karte hain,
[Guest]: toh bhai,
[Guest]: you know, I want to engage.
[Guest]: Okay?
[Guest]: And I do engage
[Guest]: with everyone on these issues.
[Guest]: But when someone crosses the line
[Guest]: about press freedom,
[Guest]: I was like,
[Guest]: boss, I've been inside, okay?
[Guest]: Don't lecture me.
[Guest]: Ki is country mein free press hain,
[Guest]: chhap toh raha hai,
[Guest]: critical articles aa toh rahe hain.
[Guest]: Tum kaise kah sakte ho sarkaar ne?
[Guest]: Censorship thodi ho rahe hain.
[Guest]: I was like, boss,
[Guest]: that is not the story.
[Guest]: You don't know how things work.
[Guest]: Don't tell me.
[Guest]: I have seen what happens.
[Guest]: And the chilling effect for me
[Guest]: was that that day,
[Guest]: the newsroom was functioning
[Guest]: as if nothing has happened.
[Guest]: People are laughing.
[Guest]: Story file kar rahe hain,
[Guest]: edit, wahan desk pe kaam chal raha hai.
[Guest]: People are roaming around,
[Guest]: graphics ban rahe hain.
[Guest]: And thankfully, like,
[Guest]: I've been fortunate.
[Guest]: I was not a daily news reporter.
[Guest]: Toh mera aisa kaam nahi tha.
[Guest]: But Amit,
[Guest]: I'm just saying that,
[Guest]: shouldn't there be something like,
[Guest]: like, is it too idealistic
[Guest]: to expect that for 15 minutes,
[Guest]: the newsroom gathers
[Guest]: and discusses, like,
[Guest]: what has happened?
[Guest]: Us din I thought ki,
[Guest]: boss, I have seen
[Guest]: Us din I thought ki, boss, I...
[Guest]: Again, you can say it's coming
[Guest]: from a sense of judgment.
[Guest]: Right? And I know
[Guest]: when I hear about
[Guest]: the kind of salaries
[Guest]: people make in journalism,
[Guest]: the exploitation that happens.
[Guest]: You know, ek,
[Guest]: someone told me, this friend,
[Guest]: that, you know,
[Guest]: when you think about morals,
[Guest]: even having,
[Guest]: thinking morally is a privilege.
[Guest]: You know?
[Guest]: Toh wo, sab hai dimaag mein.
[Guest]: But I am saying,
[Guest]: I just felt ki, yaar,
[Guest]: I didn't come to this profession
[Guest]: to become immune to these things.
[Guest]: Ki, you know, matlab...
[Amit Varma]: No, that's why I am saying,
[Amit Varma]: sab chal rahe hain groove pe.
[Amit Varma]: And which is rational.
[Unknown]: They got families to support.
[Unknown]: They have jobs.
[Unknown]: Sab chal rahe hain groove mein.
[Unknown]: Sab theek hai.
[Amit Varma]: And they're not thinking
[Amit Varma]: of press freedom.
[Amit Varma]: They're not thinking that,
[Amit Varma]: oh, you know,
[Amit Varma]: what is a great meaning
[Unknown]: of journalism and blah blah blah.
[Amit Varma]: But you are.
[Amit Varma]: So, it's almost like
[Amit Varma]: there are two games
[Amit Varma]: being played at the same time.
[Amit Varma]: And...
[Guest]: But it shapes, you know,
[Guest]: in a way.
[Guest]: Like, and there were other people,
[Guest]: at least, it's not like everyone.
[Guest]: And I don't know,
[Guest]: private mein log kya baat kar rahe the.
[Guest]: Main toh bas dekh raha hoon,
[Guest]: ki what is happening around me.
[Guest]: There were two, three of us.
[Guest]: We went down,
[Guest]: you know, had chai.
[Guest]: Soch rahe the ki,
[Guest]: what does it mean?
[Guest]: What does it mean for us?
[Guest]: What does it mean for the country?
[Guest]: All of those discussions were happening.
[Guest]: Us waqt main toh agli de,
[Guest]: main toh yahan se jaa rahe hoon.
[Guest]: I am resigning.
[Guest]: That's the thought.
[Guest]: Like, how can I be in a place
[Guest]: where so and so things are happening?
[Guest]: You know,
[Guest]: idealism ki galat ho raha hai yeh.
[Guest]: Ab wohi,
[Guest]: sahi galat wali jo cheez
[Guest]: aaye yaar rahe hai.
[Guest]: So,
[Guest]: anyway, I stuck around.
[Guest]: But I was frustrated
[Guest]: ki kya ho raha hai.
[Guest]: And fortunately,
[Guest]: because of my next boss,
[Guest]: I got a fellowship at the journal.
[Guest]: And then, Amit, what happens?
[Guest]: Now think,
[Guest]: now imagine me, okay?
[Guest]: I am coming from this place
[Guest]: where I am feeling discomforted.
[Guest]: And now I land in New York,
[Guest]: in Wall Street Journal.
[Guest]: Culture shock.
[Guest]: Big culture shock
[Guest]: because waha pe
[Guest]: these discussions are not happening.
[Guest]: I was in the investigative reporting team.
[Guest]: Ussi waqt round,
[Guest]: have you read the book Bad Blood?
[Unknown]: Or have you heard about Theranos?
[Unknown]: Yeah, of course, by Carrefour.
[Unknown]: John Carrefour.
[Guest]: John Carrefour was my colleague.
[Guest]: The team I was working with,
[Guest]: they were a Pulitzer
[Guest]: for their, you know,
[Guest]: computational data reporting
[Guest]: on Obamacare.
[Guest]: Oh no, I am forgetting.
[Guest]: Usse pehle kya hai.
[Guest]: Some Medicare in 2011-12.
[Guest]: They were telling me how they work.
[Guest]: I saw firsthand,
[Guest]: like,
[Guest]: when you talk about,
[Guest]: you know hum bhaar se dekhte the ki
[Guest]: New York Times journal ne story break kar diya.
[Guest]: Big story.
[Guest]: I was seeing, okay,
[Guest]: how that is done.
[Guest]: You know, it was happening
[Guest]: and I could see the resources they had.
[Guest]: The conversations they were happening.
[Guest]: It was about story.
[Guest]: Storytelling ki baat ho rahi hai, you know.
[Guest]: I always support my boss,
[Guest]: immediate boss,
[Guest]: one of the finest.
[Guest]: Like, he was just brilliant.
[Guest]: He was good at math,
[Guest]: good at programming,
[Guest]: good at storytelling,
[Guest]: good at investigative reporting.
[Guest]: I was like, you know.
[Guest]: And he was not boxed ki main,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: which is my other rant about
[Guest]: how people perceive data journalists.
[Guest]: He was like a solid person.
[Guest]: I'll see how he worked.
[Guest]: They thought about their families
[Guest]: and office mein aate hain.
[Guest]: They're having,
[Guest]: chill kar rahe hain
[Guest]: and then they'll work.
[Guest]: You know,
[Guest]: how big projects are being taken up.
[Guest]: I was blown away.
[Guest]: That was,
[Guest]: like, what was I being,
[Guest]: like, kaha,
[Guest]: like,
[Guest]: HD mein kya ho raha tha
[Guest]: and Wall Street Journal mein
[Guest]: kya ho raha hai, right?
[Guest]: So, now once you see it,
[Guest]: you can't unsee it.
[Guest]: Walaab aap toh aapne dekh liya.
[Guest]: That first principles yaha pe hain.
[Guest]: And I'll tell you an interesting incident
[Guest]: in John Carreyrou's book.
[Guest]: Toh Rupert Murdoch
[Guest]: owns the Wall Street Journal, okay.
[Guest]: And the Theranos story for listeners is
[Guest]: Elizabeth Holmes, I think.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So, she built this giant company,
[Guest]: you know, around,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: these diagnostic techs.
[Guest]: And big,
[Guest]: you know, I think it became
[Guest]: a $9 billion company.
[Guest]: But the whole company was a fraud.
[Guest]: And the Journal,
[Guest]: over three years,
[Guest]: exposed it.
[Guest]: And abhi, you know,
[Guest]: trial, everything is happening, right?
[Guest]: Rupert Murdoch had,
[Guest]: I think, put in,
[Guest]: I'm forgetting the exact numbers,
[Guest]: but maybe $100 million in the company.
[Guest]: He was an investor.
[Guest]: And when the first email went
[Guest]: from John Carreyrou,
[Guest]: you know, the Journal to Elizabeth Holmes,
[Guest]: you know, we are doing a story.
[Guest]: She came to New York
[Guest]: and fifth floor where we had the newsroom.
[Guest]: It's in his book.
[Guest]: She didn't go to the fifth floor.
[Guest]: She went to the seventh floor,
[Guest]: where Murdoch sometimes comes in.
[Guest]: She goes and says,
[Guest]: aapki company, aapka akbaar.
[Guest]: You know, it's your company
[Guest]: and it's your paper.
[Guest]: So, you should
[Guest]: handle it.
[Guest]: Rupert Murdoch of all people,
[Guest]: okay, of like,
[Guest]: what we know about him.
[Guest]: He says,
[Guest]: go talk to people at the fifth floor.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: I am like,
[Guest]: not the right person.
[Guest]: Not the right person.
[Guest]: When I read that anecdote,
[Guest]: I'm like,
[Guest]: I said,
[Guest]: Rupert Murdoch also has multitudes,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: whatever.
[Guest]: So,
[Guest]: that,
[Guest]: and then I saw Jeff Bezos
[Guest]: had owned,
[Guest]: you know, like he had bought Washington Post.
[Guest]: And I read a story in the front,
[Guest]: you know, on the homepage of Washington Post,
[Guest]: where it was about
[Guest]: how Amazon Alexa
[Guest]: is surveilling on users.
[Guest]: Okay, it was the lead,
[Guest]: I think big story on WAPO.
[Guest]: And I was like,
[Guest]: okay,
[Guest]: Bezos owns
[Guest]: Amazon.
[Guest]: Bezos owns Washington Post.
[Guest]: So,
[Guest]: this is first principles.
[Amit Varma]: And this is also a set of values
[Amit Varma]: embedded in these institutions.
[Unknown]: Institutions, right?
[Unknown]: And nothing here.
[Guest]: Nothing here, right?
[Guest]: So, again,
[Guest]: I still feel I had,
[Guest]: later I realized that
[Guest]: this comparison is not fair.
[Guest]: You know, it's a political economy
[Guest]: of India is different.
[Guest]: So,
[Guest]: but,
[Guest]: what I'm saying is,
[Guest]: you see that,
[Guest]: whatever you imagine,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: How media institutions should be.
[Guest]: I saw it.
[Guest]: I also saw the flaws,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: But I'm saying, I saw.
[Guest]: I come back to HD.
[Guest]: Day one,
[Guest]: I am listening,
[Guest]: this story won't be published.
[Guest]: I came there,
[Guest]: in the journal,
[Guest]: I would pitch an idea
[Guest]: and discussing,
[Guest]: people are like,
[Guest]: okay, we can do it this way,
[Guest]: you know, we'll do it that way.
[Guest]: Here, oh, no, no, no, no,
[Guest]: not like,
[Guest]: who will like,
[Guest]: this story won't be published.
[Guest]: You're walking around,
[Guest]: this is day one.
[Guest]: Someone is coming and telling me,
[Guest]: that story won't be published,
[Guest]: it won't be like this.
[Guest]: So, I was so confused,
[Guest]: that, you know,
[Guest]: just around the time,
[Guest]: I'm mentioning this
[Guest]: because this is a contrast.
[Guest]: I just returned from the US.
[Guest]: And Hindustan Times leadership summit,
[Guest]: was supposed to happen in a month.
[Guest]: And I was just placed
[Guest]: in the political bureau.
[Guest]: And they're talking about,
[Guest]: ministers go invite,
[Guest]: you have to invite ministers,
[Guest]: you have to invite bureaucrats.
[Guest]: And again,
[Guest]: I was thinking,
[Guest]: boss, what is happening?
[Guest]: If a reporter has to go
[Guest]: and invite a politician.
[Amit Varma]: Oh, they didn't have a separate team
[Amit Varma]: for all of this.
[Guest]: Because you are meeting them,
[Guest]: day to day.
[Guest]: So, if you're giving the secretary,
[Guest]: I was like,
[Guest]: like, how will reporting work?
[Guest]: Sometimes I get, you know,
[Guest]: some friends tell me that,
[Guest]: if you have to build sources,
[Guest]: you can't offend them on a daily basis.
[Guest]: That's different.
[Guest]: Like, it's complicated,
[Guest]: but I'm saying it's different.
[Guest]: Here, you're inviting them
[Guest]: to your conference.
[Guest]: So again, I was like,
[Guest]: what is happening?
[Guest]: On the other hand,
[Guest]: I was conflicted because largely,
[Guest]: I think HT was doing news fine.
[Guest]: The story is also breaking.
[Guest]: HT broke a big story on Rafale.
[Guest]: Now, if I tell anyone,
[Guest]: they don't believe it.
[Guest]: There was a big story on Rafale,
[Guest]: which Hindustan Times broke.
[Guest]: I think those colleagues,
[Guest]: when things happened in Kashmir,
[Guest]: front page stories in HT
[Guest]: challenging the government.
[Guest]: So, there was a big cognitive dissonance.
[Guest]: I could not understand.
[Guest]: On one hand,
[Guest]: the way, you know,
[Guest]: the editor-in-chief at the time,
[Guest]: he would handle meetings.
[Guest]: And I felt like,
[Guest]: what a smart guy is commissioning
[Guest]: these stories,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: which will challenge critical.
[Guest]: And on the other hand,
[Guest]: I'm seeing all of this.
[Guest]: So, I'm saying,
[Guest]: you see all of these things
[Guest]: and, you know,
[Guest]: questions come in about,
[Guest]: what is...
[Guest]: But one day,
[Guest]: something happened at HT
[Guest]: and I gave up.
[Guest]: I went back to my home.
[Guest]: Again, thankfully,
[Guest]: I had my diary.
[Guest]: I wrote it down.
[Guest]: I slept,
[Guest]: stayed on that for a week.
[Guest]: And I typed my resignation letter
[Guest]: that I'm done.
[Guest]: I'm done.
[Guest]: And I resigned.
[Guest]: Thankfully,
[Guest]: my boss was kind enough.
[Guest]: In two weeks,
[Guest]: I was out of HT.
[Guest]: This is around January 19.
[Guest]: So, that day,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: I still have this whole page
[Guest]: in my diary
[Guest]: where I've exactly written
[Guest]: what I felt.
[Guest]: Why I left.
[Guest]: And, you know,
[Guest]: anytime I'm like,
[Guest]: my boss was so generous
[Guest]: at the time that,
[Guest]: I don't know if there are
[Guest]: 25-year-old reporters
[Guest]: who get like,
[Guest]: my boss gave me freedom,
[Guest]: that boss,
[Guest]: don't forget daily.
[Guest]: You take one month
[Guest]: to write one story,
[Guest]: I'll give you one page in the paper.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: That was the promise he made
[Guest]: and he used to do that.
[Guest]: So, I used to think,
[Guest]: have I gone mad?
[Guest]: Like, who...
[Guest]: The HT real estate.
[Guest]: In your head, you know,
[Guest]: it's like,
[Guest]: so many million copies go,
[Guest]: you know, people read.
[Guest]: So, I sometimes felt that,
[Guest]: I wasn't a fool.
[Guest]: Like, you left that opportunity.
[Guest]: But I had that page in my diary.
[Guest]: You know,
[Guest]: which is why
[Guest]: that thing about moral compass,
[Guest]: I think that
[Guest]: my journal holds me accountable.
[Guest]: Can you talk more about that
[Amit Varma]: or you're not comfortable?
[Guest]: About that incident.
[Guest]: Okay, I won't go
[Guest]: into specific concrete.
[Guest]: There's another story
[Guest]: I can tell you
[Guest]: in another institution.
[Guest]: But in this,
[Guest]: there's a story I wrote,
[Guest]: which had something to do
[Guest]: with the prime minister.
[Guest]: But it was not,
[Guest]: honestly, I mean,
[Guest]: it's not a story that,
[Guest]: I'll say that,
[Guest]: I, you know,
[Guest]: like, I broke this story.
[Guest]: It was, I broke this story.
[Guest]: I thought it's a normal story.
[Guest]: My editor just sat on it.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: My problem was not sometimes,
[Guest]: you know, see,
[Guest]: I'm not an idiot that
[Guest]: I don't know the pressures
[Guest]: that editors face,
[Guest]: you know.
[Guest]: And I think one of the
[Guest]: most inspiring things
[Guest]: inside newsrooms
[Guest]: is to see editors,
[Guest]: who despite knowing
[Guest]: all the pressures,
[Guest]: fight their way out
[Guest]: to get a story in the paper.
[Guest]: I hope that
[Guest]: if readers could see,
[Guest]: you know, the daily fights
[Guest]: that journalists
[Guest]: fight inside the newsroom
[Guest]: to get things in the paper,
[Guest]: despite the pressures,
[Guest]: you know, the model of,
[Guest]: you know, this,
[Guest]: so I don't like this phrasing
[Guest]: of Godi media,
[Guest]: you know, I like Ravish,
[Guest]: but this whole Godi media
[Guest]: framing makes me,
[Guest]: it's a very simplistic narrative.
[Guest]: Because individuals fight
[Guest]: within these places.
[Guest]: Yeah, and see,
[Guest]: if something gets published,
[Guest]: then you won't know
[Guest]: what's behind it.
[Guest]: If something is not published,
[Guest]: then you'll know,
[Guest]: like I'm telling you now,
[Guest]: then you'll feel,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: there is a problem.
[Guest]: So I'm saying,
[Guest]: when things are normal,
[Guest]: you don't know that
[Guest]: there's something more
[Guest]: that has happened
[Guest]: to see what you're reading
[Guest]: that way, you know?
[Guest]: So, and that goes up
[Guest]: to the level of proprietors,
[Guest]: because, you know,
[Guest]: now I try to talk
[Guest]: to a lot of senior people
[Guest]: in my profession
[Guest]: rather than people in 20s,
[Guest]: because I want to know from them,
[Guest]: you know, what has changed?
[Guest]: What are you seeing?
[Guest]: And I'm fortunate that
[Guest]: a lot of senior people
[Guest]: in this profession
[Guest]: have given me time
[Guest]: one-to-one,
[Guest]: telling me like
[Guest]: detailed stories
[Guest]: about their interactions
[Guest]: with proprietors,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: challenges they have faced.
[Guest]: And that really inspires me
[Guest]: that they have stuck
[Guest]: to this profession.
[Guest]: They know,
[Guest]: and they are in the top positions,
[Guest]: you know, so anyway.
[Guest]: So the point I was trying
[Guest]: to make that in HD,
[Guest]: this is my editor
[Guest]: sat on a story.
[Guest]: My problem was not
[Guest]: you sat on a story.
[Guest]: The problem was
[Guest]: you ignored it.
[Guest]: You come and tell me,
[Guest]: boss, there's a problem.
[Guest]: You just behaved as if
[Guest]: nothing happened,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: that there's no story.
[Guest]: You just pretend as if,
[Guest]: and that,
[Guest]: you know, it's just,
[Guest]: I don't know, like, how can I,
[Guest]: like, how will I find the motivation
[Guest]: to work on my next story?
[Guest]: I used to write
[Amit Varma]: for a major newspaper.
[Amit Varma]: And I won't take names,
[Amit Varma]: but I mean, it's guessable.
[Unknown]: And my thing with them was that
[Amit Varma]: even if they change a word
[Amit Varma]: in my column,
[Amit Varma]: they have to send a playback
[Amit Varma]: and I'll approve it.
[Amit Varma]: And all that, and they knew
[Amit Varma]: I was very particular about that.
[Amit Varma]: So one day my editor
[Amit Varma]: kind of called me
[Amit Varma]: just when the playback was due
[Amit Varma]: and she was almost in tears.
[Amit Varma]: And she said, Amit,
[Amit Varma]: I wanted to call you
[Amit Varma]: and speak to you
[Amit Varma]: because if I just send you a mail,
[Amit Varma]: I know you'll get very angry.
[Amit Varma]: That in your column,
[Amit Varma]: and it was, of course,
[Amit Varma]: very critical of the government.
[Amit Varma]: And even in the past,
[Amit Varma]: this newspaper had carried
[Amit Varma]: many columns by me,
[Amit Varma]: very critical of the government,
[Amit Varma]: including when I had
[Amit Varma]: blasted demonetization,
[Amit Varma]: a piece that was, you know,
[Unknown]: retweeted by Rahul Gandhi
[Unknown]: and Kejriwal.
[Unknown]: And everyone.
[Amit Varma]: And she said that
[Amit Varma]: I know you'll get angry,
[Amit Varma]: but there is one sentence
[Amit Varma]: I have to cut
[Amit Varma]: and I am sort of,
[Amit Varma]: I have to cut it.
[Amit Varma]: And it's because we have been,
[Amit Varma]: there's been a lot of pressure
[Amit Varma]: from above and about
[Amit Varma]: two people in particular,
[Amit Varma]: you know, me and somebody else.
[Amit Varma]: I won't name,
[Amit Varma]: but a person who's been
[Amit Varma]: a guest on my show.
[Unknown]: And all this is easy to guess.
[Unknown]: Yeah, very easy.
[Amit Varma]: And there have been complaints
[Amit Varma]: about the two of you
[Amit Varma]: and there's a lot of pressure.
[Unknown]: So I'll just cut this one sentence
[Unknown]: and I let the rest of it stay.
[Amit Varma]: And what do you want to do?
[Amit Varma]: And the rest of the column
[Amit Varma]: was very critical.
[Amit Varma]: So I said, keep it.
[Amit Varma]: You know, if it's just at one line,
[Amit Varma]: it's fine.
[Amit Varma]: The rest of it,
[Amit Varma]: it's basically saying
[Unknown]: what I want to say.
[Amit Varma]: And if you kind of go to
[Amit Varma]: indiancut.com
[Amit Varma]: and you go to the original piece,
[Unknown]: you can make out what the line is,
[Unknown]: but whatever,
[Amit Varma]: it doesn't really matter.
[Amit Varma]: And then I started thinking about,
[Amit Varma]: okay, what is the correct
[Unknown]: course of action for me now?
[Amit Varma]: And this other person
[Amit Varma]: in the same boat as me
[Amit Varma]: chose not to write for them anymore.
[Amit Varma]: And my question was,
[Amit Varma]: okay, what do I do
[Amit Varma]: if I give up this space?
[Amit Varma]: And it's an important space
[Amit Varma]: in a big newspaper,
[Amit Varma]: then the space might be taken
[Amit Varma]: by somebody who is more
[Amit Varma]: client to the government.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: So should I continue to fight
[Amit Varma]: in small ways
[Amit Varma]: in whatever way I can,
[Amit Varma]: or should I give it up?
[Amit Varma]: So I made a choice to keep writing.
[Amit Varma]: I think I wrote one
[Amit Varma]: or two more pieces for them.
[Amit Varma]: And then I gave it up anyway,
[Amit Varma]: because of the sort of logic
[Amit Varma]: I went into earlier.
[Unknown]: There's no point writing
[Amit Varma]: for anybody else.
[Amit Varma]: But, and I want to underscore
[Amit Varma]: that point that these are,
[Amit Varma]: you know, editors
[Amit Varma]: in all of these places
[Amit Varma]: at an individual level,
[Amit Varma]: have had to face
[Amit Varma]: very difficult choices.
[Amit Varma]: Absolutely.
[Amit Varma]: And they have fought
[Amit Varma]: the good fight.
[Unknown]: Yeah.
[Unknown]: You know?
[Unknown]: These people carried
[Amit Varma]: countless critical pieces
[Amit Varma]: by me of this particular government
[Amit Varma]: in the harshest possible terms.
[Amit Varma]: But it's just the incentives
[Amit Varma]: of the game.
[Amit Varma]: It's not that the people
[Guest]: are craven,
[Guest]: that they are bad,
[Guest]: nothing.
[Guest]: It's just the incentives.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: And I think that is what makes,
[Guest]: you know, which is why
[Guest]: I keep saying to my friends,
[Guest]: like, I'd really love to talk
[Guest]: to people outside the press
[Guest]: about how the media works.
[Guest]: Like, you know, I have
[Guest]: what I saw in the seven years.
[Guest]: And this is a point
[Guest]: that we should not be complacent.
[Guest]: We, you know,
[Guest]: my model is that
[Guest]: like there is a,
[Guest]: like you can't dissociate
[Guest]: the press from the
[Guest]: politics of the country.
[Guest]: You are an idiot
[Guest]: if you are ignoring,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: but we should not
[Guest]: become complacent.
[Guest]: That normal,
[Guest]: that, you know,
[Guest]: when you start feeling
[Guest]: it's normal,
[Guest]: that.
[Guest]: So my only thing was that
[Guest]: did the editor
[Guest]: not trust me enough
[Guest]: to say that, boss,
[Guest]: this is what it is.
[Guest]: The fact that you ignore it.
[Guest]: You tell me that
[Guest]: how will I get the motivation
[Guest]: to work on my next story?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I just think that
[Amit Varma]: it's an ethic
[Amit Varma]: that I've developed now.
[Amit Varma]: I know I can't go back in the past
[Amit Varma]: and think about whether
[Amit Varma]: I would have reacted this way
[Amit Varma]: 20 years ago.
[Amit Varma]: But my ethic today would be
[Amit Varma]: if I am in that position
[Amit Varma]: of being an editor,
[Amit Varma]: I am going to be totally straightforward
[Guest]: with everyone I work with.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: Everyone's an adult.
[Guest]: I'll be straightforward.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: You tell,
[Guest]: and you just tell me,
[Guest]: that's what I'm saying.
[Guest]: You just be upfront that, boss,
[Guest]: this is the situation.
[Guest]: No big deal.
[Guest]: There's one story.
[Guest]: We'll do another story.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: And so,
[Guest]: so that's what,
[Guest]: and you know,
[Guest]: one of my frames
[Guest]: for thinking about this
[Guest]: is that, you know,
[Guest]: it's easy to stick to your principles
[Guest]: 100% of the time
[Guest]: rather than 90% of the time.
[Guest]: Wow.
[Guest]: One of my friends,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: as we were discussing,
[Guest]: he told me,
[Guest]: that's easy because
[Guest]: the cognitive load goes away.
[Amit Varma]: You know.
[Amit Varma]: Wow.
[Amit Varma]: That's beautiful.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So, you stick to it.
[Guest]: You know,
[Guest]: that it's like that.
[Guest]: So, and again,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: I know I just told you
[Guest]: this whole HT story.
[Guest]: You know,
[Guest]: I never,
[Guest]: thankfully,
[Guest]: it's, you know,
[Guest]: the later part of the episode.
[Guest]: But, you know,
[Guest]: and when I left HTI,
[Guest]: only two or three friends knew
[Guest]: why this has happened.
[Guest]: I made excuses,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: I am done with journalism.
[Guest]: You know,
[Guest]: like I want to break.
[Guest]: I want to write long form.
[Guest]: Because, you know,
[Guest]: you feel that,
[Guest]: if I tell someone,
[Guest]: right,
[Guest]: I don't want to be a martyr
[Guest]: because I'm not.
[Guest]: You know,
[Guest]: sometimes,
[Guest]: this whole resignation stories
[Guest]: feel like,
[Guest]: again,
[Guest]: hi, poor guy.
[Guest]: You know,
[Guest]: he wants to do such a good job,
[Guest]: but they are not letting him do it.
[Guest]: So, I'm saying,
[Guest]: it's,
[Guest]: that's not the.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: No, I mean,
[Amit Varma]: we've already established
[Amit Varma]: that no one listens to this podcast.
[Unknown]: So, it's fine.
[Guest]: But yeah,
[Guest]: I'll tell you one thing,
[Guest]: which I do want to hear
[Amit Varma]: my India Today experience.
[Amit Varma]: Yes, I do.
[Amit Varma]: Of course.
[Amit Varma]: I want to hear every story, boss.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: So I'll tell you the India Today story
[Guest]: without taking names.
[Guest]: But yeah,
[Guest]: so I went to India Today.
[Guest]: They approached me
[Guest]: because I just wanted to see exit polling.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: I'm big on forecast.
[Guest]: I love stats.
[Guest]: And I heard that,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: this Axis thing,
[Guest]: I wanted to see
[Guest]: behind the scenes,
[Guest]: like, you know,
[Guest]: how they work
[Guest]: and how does TV work?
[Guest]: So that was my curiosity.
[Guest]: So,
[Guest]: election,
[Guest]: this is before the 2019 election.
[Guest]: I worked there for two months
[Guest]: as a consultant,
[Guest]: as a reporter,
[Guest]: but I was on a consulting
[Guest]: two month arrangement.
[Guest]: And I will not get into details
[Guest]: about election forecasting,
[Guest]: but just so the people know,
[Guest]: they're brilliant at it.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: Even, you know,
[Guest]: when Axis had put out this forecast,
[Guest]: I saw all the nasty
[Guest]: Twitter debate,
[Guest]: even from people I respected,
[Guest]: that, you know,
[Guest]: India Today plays numbers from behind.
[Guest]: I was like,
[Guest]: boss,
[Guest]: nothing, man.
[Guest]: I mean,
[Guest]: they are doing solid.
[Guest]: There's guy Pradeep Gupta at Axis.
[Guest]: He's doing solid work.
[Guest]: Because I interviewed him
[Guest]: about the methodology,
[Guest]: I saw his sheets,
[Guest]: great.
[Guest]: So there is this whole narrative,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: because India Today is like this,
[Guest]: their forecast is also
[Guest]: sold out,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: that's the term.
[Guest]: So,
[Guest]: and I saw all the conspiracy theories
[Guest]: people created.
[Guest]: So it just
[Guest]: feels weird that
[Guest]: you are so smart, man.
[Guest]: Why isn't your brain working here?
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So anyway,
[Guest]: so keep that part aside.
[Guest]: I am not
[Guest]: talking about it now.
[Guest]: Let's talk about my experience.
[Guest]: So,
[Guest]: I'll just tell you one story.
[Guest]: Even now,
[Guest]: it's going to go.
[Guest]: There's this thing that I know,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: one day in the newsroom,
[Guest]: I didn't have much to do.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: I was free.
[Guest]: But, you know,
[Guest]: I didn't feel good.
[Guest]: That I'm sitting free, man.
[Guest]: For two months,
[Guest]: they have come
[Guest]: and they were paying me well.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: So I didn't feel like,
[Guest]: why am I sitting free?
[Guest]: I should do some story.
[Guest]: Should do some story.
[Guest]: So,
[Guest]: in the,
[Guest]: there was this room where
[Guest]: a couple of people were sitting
[Guest]: and I just told them,
[Guest]: do you know that,
[Guest]: Mr. Modi
[Guest]: and Mr. Gandhi,
[Guest]: if you look at the Twitter matrix,
[Guest]: Mr. Gandhi gets more retweets,
[Guest]: average retweets per tweet
[Guest]: are higher than Mr. Modi.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: And they were like,
[Guest]: wow,
[Guest]: is it?
[Guest]: I said,
[Guest]: I tried to tell them,
[Guest]: it's not like news break.
[Guest]: And they're like,
[Guest]: interesting things
[Guest]: that people have done on Twitter.
[Guest]: This is just like,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: banal thing.
[Guest]: But they were like,
[Guest]: no,
[Guest]: that's interesting.
[Guest]: And I was working
[Guest]: on a separate project
[Guest]: at the time
[Guest]: with a couple of friends,
[Guest]: where we had collected
[Guest]: this database of
[Guest]: all Indian parliamentarians,
[Guest]: their Twitter handles.
[Guest]: So I had this giant
[Guest]: Twitter,
[Guest]: their tweets had a repository.
[Guest]: So, you know,
[Guest]: I could do anything with
[Guest]: all of these
[Guest]: accounts.
[Guest]: So we said,
[Guest]: to make it a little different,
[Guest]: we will do an MP.
[Guest]: We will rank all the MPs.
[Guest]: And because this
[Guest]: Modi-Gandhi,
[Guest]: it will be the
[Guest]: lead,
[Guest]: so to say.
[Guest]: So I did that.
[Guest]: Story was done.
[Guest]: It was not a big deal.
[Guest]: Now what happens?
[Guest]: It got shared on Twitter.
[Guest]: There was abuse.
[Guest]: India Today is running propaganda.
[Guest]: Because you know.
[Guest]: And one thing I'll tell you,
[Guest]: the same thing happened at HD.
[Guest]: Actually,
[Guest]: for very clear reasons,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: I mean,
[Guest]: I just feel that,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: our Indian politicians,
[Guest]: like,
[Guest]: could retweet numbers.
[Guest]: You know, even the prime minister,
[Guest]: like,
[Guest]: they're so attached to it.
[Amit Varma]: Anti-metrics.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So, you know,
[Guest]: sometimes I was like,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: if Mr. Modi meets me in a party,
[Guest]: I would like to tell him,
[Guest]: boss,
[Guest]: don't behave like a 20-year-old reporter.
[Guest]: You're a prime minister.
[Guest]: Anyway,
[Guest]: so, but it irritates them.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: So I go to the,
[Guest]: I knew it because
[Guest]: something happened at HD
[Guest]: on similar lines.
[Guest]: So I go
[Guest]: and this person calls me the editor
[Guest]: and he says,
[Guest]: did you look at other metrics also?
[Guest]: You know,
[Guest]: while doing your analysis,
[Guest]: average retweets per tweet
[Guest]: and all that.
[Guest]: I said, yeah, I saw it.
[Guest]: He says, okay.
[Guest]: Then he shows me his phone.
[Guest]: He shows me a screenshot on WhatsApp.
[Guest]: He tells me that,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: this person who manages
[Guest]: social media for Mr. Modi,
[Guest]: he says, you know,
[Guest]: you have used the wrong metrics.
[Guest]: You have taken the wrong ones.
[Guest]: You should have used the rest.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: So at first point,
[Guest]: I was like,
[Guest]: who is this person to tell me?
[Guest]: It's my story.
[Guest]: I am the analyst.
[Guest]: How can you say I'm wrong?
[Guest]: Like, you know,
[Guest]: it's almost a,
[Guest]: you tell me,
[Guest]: Samarth, you're the shittiest reporter.
[Guest]: You're the worst writer.
[Guest]: Don't question my integrity.
[Guest]: You know,
[Guest]: because I don't care about
[Guest]: who wins, who doesn't win.
[Guest]: That's now my frame where,
[Guest]: like I'm single-handedly
[Guest]: focused on my story.
[Guest]: What happens after the story?
[Guest]: I don't care.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So,
[Guest]: so I was like,
[Guest]: though I kept it inside me,
[Guest]: but I was like, okay, go on.
[Guest]: So they said that,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: you should look at other metrics.
[Guest]: So I was like, did you,
[Guest]: did you see other metrics?
[Guest]: I was like, I saw them,
[Guest]: but I chose these ones.
[Guest]: So I said, okay.
[Guest]: So I said, why don't you do
[Guest]: another story
[Guest]: with these other metrics?
[Guest]: I said, okay, I'll consider.
[Guest]: So I did something.
[Guest]: And then I came back and asked,
[Guest]: I can do a story with some other metrics.
[Guest]: And they said,
[Guest]: does that show
[Guest]: that Mr. Modi is better?
[Guest]: I was shocked.
[Guest]: That is not the point
[Guest]: why I would write a story.
[Guest]: Why I would write my story
[Guest]: if the data was telling me that.
[Guest]: And it was in some cases,
[Guest]: but I'm saying the question was
[Guest]: inappropriate.
[Guest]: Like, how can you ask me that question?
[Guest]: Was my thing.
[Guest]: So anyway, they said,
[Guest]: you know, you do a,
[Guest]: said, okay, I'll do another story.
[Guest]: The two threads,
[Guest]: so I'll just tell one story
[Guest]: and another one.
[Guest]: So I said, okay, I went
[Guest]: and I did a,
[Guest]: okay, so let me put it this way.
[Guest]: I took four metrics
[Guest]: in which two,
[Guest]: I think Rahul was better
[Guest]: and two Mr. Modi was better.
[Guest]: Mr. Rahul and Mr. Modi.
[Guest]: And you know, Amit,
[Guest]: what happens next?
[Guest]: I try to write something that,
[Guest]: you know, because I was not lying.
[Guest]: This is what the numbers were saying.
[Guest]: And I was like,
[Guest]: readers can interpret.
[Guest]: And anyway, in my head,
[Guest]: I knew this is so banal.
[Guest]: Like it does not tell me
[Unknown]: anything about Indian politics.
[Unknown]: There's nothing meaningful.
[Amit Varma]: There's nothing meaningful, right?
[Guest]: It's meaningless.
[Guest]: It's just that one day,
[Guest]: I was sitting idle.
[Guest]: And I was, you know,
[Guest]: that's it.
[Guest]: Nothing more than that.
[Guest]: So what do they do?
[Guest]: They story file it.
[Guest]: And I see the story on the internet,
[Guest]: you know.
[Guest]: So my lead,
[Guest]: which was like,
[Guest]: balance, balance, balance.
[Guest]: They blew it from there.
[Guest]: Okay, they just
[Guest]: didn't even edit the story.
[Guest]: They put the top one down.
[Guest]: The rearrangement of the charts,
[Guest]: which was tuk-tuk-tuk.
[Guest]: The two charts that showed Mr. Modi.
[Guest]: You know that balance?
[Guest]: They brought it up.
[Guest]: Mr. Gandhi's took it down.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: And I was like,
[Guest]: what nonsense is this, man?
[Guest]: Like you don't even tell the reporter
[Unknown]: what you're doing.
[Unknown]: And a byline was there.
[Unknown]: My byline was there.
[Guest]: So I got really angry.
[Guest]: I emailed,
[Guest]: remove my byline.
[Guest]: Remove my byline.
[Guest]: So the person at the desk,
[Guest]: he could not understand.
[Guest]: Like, who asks?
[Guest]: I said, I can't explain.
[Guest]: Just remove my byline.
[Guest]: They confirmed.
[Guest]: I said, yes, remove it.
[Guest]: Because Amit,
[Guest]: my philosophy is clear.
[Guest]: I still have disagreements
[Guest]: with editors.
[Guest]: You know, it happens.
[Guest]: All of us.
[Guest]: Headline, angle.
[Guest]: Once a story is published
[Guest]: under your name,
[Guest]: then I am responsible.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: You have to fight
[Guest]: before the story is published.
[Guest]: You do the fight with the editor.
[Guest]: But if the story is out,
[Guest]: and there are stories on the internet,
[Guest]: which I feel uncomfortable about.
[Guest]: In retrospection.
[Guest]: And good stories.
[Guest]: I'm not talking
[Guest]: in independent newsrooms.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: Where I felt, no,
[Guest]: I am embarrassed.
[Guest]: Not with the writing,
[Guest]: but my story.
[Guest]: But now it's my name.
[Guest]: So just take responsibility.
[Guest]: But this is not my consent.
[Guest]: So I was very angry there.
[Guest]: How can you do this?
[Guest]: It's like,
[Guest]: did I come here for this?
[Guest]: No.
[Guest]: Then,
[Guest]: we go on TV.
[Guest]: Okay?
[Guest]: On TV, Amit,
[Guest]: it was,
[Guest]: I saw what happened.
[Guest]: It was just disaster management.
[Guest]: The whole show is about,
[Guest]: how Mr. Gandhi
[Guest]: was a latecomer to Twitter.
[Guest]: Mr. Modi, who's old,
[Guest]: but he's like the star.
[Guest]: And this discussion is going on.
[Guest]: And I am on TV,
[Guest]: on the show.
[Guest]: And,
[Guest]: I was not told
[Guest]: what is going to happen.
[Guest]: I'm just listening it live.
[Guest]: And I was shocked.
[Guest]: Because it's,
[Guest]: and they're saying,
[Guest]: analysis by Mr. Samarth Mansal.
[Guest]: And,
[Guest]: it's just discomforting that,
[Guest]: I am in a TV show,
[Guest]: where,
[Guest]: like,
[Guest]: there is some disaster management going on.
[Guest]: Because, of course,
[Guest]: when the Twitter thing happened,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: TV is the biggest platform.
[Guest]: So, there is disaster management going on.
[Guest]: And in between,
[Guest]: there was one line,
[Guest]: however, Mr. Gandhi is better on this one metric.
[Guest]: And then,
[Guest]: I realized that,
[Guest]: you know, that,
[Guest]: like, how these things happen.
[Guest]: Like, if you're on the outside,
[Unknown]: how would you know?
[Unknown]: Yeah.
[Guest]: This is something I'm observing
[Amit Varma]: from the inside.
[Amit Varma]: You would think,
[Amit Varma]: how is Samarth doing the story?
[Guest]: What happened to him?
[Guest]: Forget that.
[Guest]: Forget that, right?
[Guest]: You could just think,
[Guest]: yeah, the numbers are telling something, right?
[Guest]: What is that?
[Guest]: It's like,
[Guest]: more followers,
[Guest]: more tweets,
[Guest]: whatever, whatever.
[Guest]: Again, I just want to keep re-emphasizing
[Guest]: for such a banal thing as metrics.
[Guest]: There's like,
[Guest]: there's nothing policy,
[Guest]: there is nothing government,
[Guest]: nothing.
[Guest]: Some stupid social media numbers,
[Guest]: like,
[Guest]: you're being slaved to Jack Dorsey,
[Guest]: right?
[Amit Varma]: Nothing else.
[Unknown]: Doesn't affect the country in any way.
[Unknown]: Fight over GDP, man.
[Unknown]: What is this?
[Unknown]: What is this, right?
[Guest]: So, I'm seeing this whole drama happening,
[Guest]: okay?
[Guest]: And I was Amit,
[Guest]: and, you know,
[Guest]: the day this was happening,
[Guest]: that was the press freedom day.
[Guest]: I think it was 3rd May,
[Guest]: 2019.
[Guest]: I'm remembering from memory,
[Guest]: I think press freedom day.
[Guest]: So, I was like,
[Guest]: now I understand,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: how TV works.
[Guest]: And it's not that people in India today
[Guest]: were not smart,
[Guest]: damn smart people,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: they knew stuff,
[Guest]: but this happens.
[Guest]: So, I said,
[Guest]: come on,
[Guest]: now this thing is over.
[Guest]: It didn't,
[Guest]: it was not over.
[Guest]: Then,
[Guest]: they asked me to do another story,
[Guest]: that,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: there are too many MPs,
[Guest]: we should look at political leaders.
[Guest]: So, why don't,
[Guest]: pick 10 leaders across the country,
[Guest]: one from every party,
[Guest]: okay?
[Guest]: And have diversity,
[Guest]: and do a similar thing.
[Guest]: So, I was like,
[Guest]: I have it,
[Guest]: I don't even have to put in effort.
[Guest]: But I didn't want to take any responsibility.
[Guest]: I said,
[Guest]: like, how do you choose the 10?
[Guest]: There are so many politicians in India.
[Guest]: So, I just had a list,
[Guest]: that from every state,
[Guest]: you take one, one,
[Guest]: and one party,
[Guest]: one person.
[Guest]: I took the list,
[Guest]: went and said,
[Guest]: this is a list,
[Guest]: please,
[Guest]: you tell me,
[Guest]: if this is fine.
[Guest]: If you want to make changes,
[Guest]: I don't mind,
[Guest]: I have all stats.
[Guest]: They said, no, no,
[Guest]: this list is fine,
[Guest]: go ahead.
[Guest]: Story over.
[Guest]: I am told next day,
[Guest]: that, you know,
[Guest]: this list,
[Guest]: there were 10.
[Guest]: Add Amit Shah.
[Guest]: And I was like,
[Guest]: no, but the rule was that,
[Guest]: one,
[Guest]: politician per party,
[Guest]: Mr. Modi is in the list.
[Guest]: So, where,
[Guest]: like,
[Guest]: why should Amit Shah be,
[Guest]: on the list?
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: And they were like,
[Guest]: no, you know what,
[Guest]: Modi is PM.
[Unknown]: So,
[Guest]: I was like,
[Guest]: come on,
[Guest]: let's add Amit Shah,
[Guest]: I don't care.
[Guest]: I added Amit Shah on the list.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: Then again,
[Guest]: they do a TV show,
[Guest]: etc., etc.
[Guest]: It's done.
[Guest]: Maybe Amit Shah was happy that,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: he is not being left out
[Guest]: with Mr. Modi.
[Guest]: That happens.
[Guest]: Now, next day,
[Guest]: now this is a weekend.
[Guest]: I am,
[Guest]: I was going from Pitampura,
[Guest]: to Lajpat Nagar,
[Guest]: I was going,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: for my dance class.
[Guest]: I was taking dance classes
[Guest]: at the time.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So, I was behaving like
[Guest]: that weird guy,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: in the metro,
[Guest]: I was earphones plugged,
[Guest]: and I'm practicing my moves,
[Guest]: because I was single-handedly
[Unknown]: focused on dance.
[Guest]: I get out of my metro,
[Guest]: and I get a call from India Today.
[Guest]: They said,
[Guest]: Samarth,
[Guest]: what have you done?
[Guest]: I'm like,
[Guest]: what have I done?
[Guest]: They're saying,
[Guest]: you know what,
[Guest]: election time is going on,
[Guest]: and Akhilesh Yadav is angry.
[Guest]: We have four women
[Guest]: star anchors of India Today
[Guest]: in Lucknow.
[Guest]: They are standing on the bus,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: they have to go around Lucknow
[Guest]: to interview Mr. Yadav.
[Guest]: But Mr. Yadav has refused
[Guest]: to come on the bus,
[Guest]: because he is not in your list.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: What kind of people are they?
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: And I was like,
[Guest]: like,
[Guest]: what?
[Guest]: And he was not in the list,
[Guest]: because I had Mayawati on the list,
[Guest]: and I just,
[Guest]: like, you know,
[Guest]: there are not 10 states
[Guest]: in the country,
[Guest]: I can't.
[Guest]: So,
[Guest]: and this was just
[Guest]: what the editor approved,
[Guest]: that this is fine, right?
[Guest]: So, I was so mad at Akhilesh,
[Guest]: because I had to miss my dance class,
[Guest]: go back home,
[Guest]: and, you know,
[Guest]: I had to give stats for Akhilesh.
[Guest]: And then, of course,
[Guest]: he came on the bus.
[Guest]: Now,
[Guest]: you are thinking that,
[Guest]: I mean, that day,
[Guest]: and next day,
[Guest]: Tejaswi Yadav gets angry,
[Guest]: because, like,
[Guest]: you, India,
[Guest]: do discuss this,
[Guest]: because I am not in the list.
[Guest]: And I was like,
[Guest]: because Nitish Kumar is on the list.
[Guest]: So,
[Guest]: and again,
[Guest]: you can now say,
[Guest]: ki yaar,
[Guest]: what was this list?
[Guest]: You know,
[Guest]: one can say,
[Guest]: ki tumne das ka kyu kya?
[Guest]: But the point is,
[Guest]: Amit,
[Guest]: the point I am trying to say,
[Guest]: I learned from this,
[Guest]: that the story is absolutely bullshit,
[Guest]: tells nothing about Indian politics.
[Guest]: But what happened behind the scenes,
[Guest]: that was telling me more that,
[Guest]: what, like,
[Guest]: how thin-skinned these people are,
[Guest]: like, you know,
[Guest]: how much,
[Guest]: like, I don't,
[Guest]: I was speechless.
[Guest]: And the fact that
[Guest]: newsrooms
[Guest]: were complying
[Guest]: on
[Guest]: idiotic things like this,
[Guest]: you know.
[Guest]: To aap,
[Guest]: mean,
[Guest]: kya hi baat karoge?
[Guest]: And of course,
[Guest]: then I had other observations
[Guest]: at India Today,
[Guest]: where I saw,
[Guest]: main TV toh dekhta hi nahi,
[Guest]: but uss waqt,
[Guest]: because the TV was in front of me,
[Guest]: then I saw
[Guest]: what was going on TV,
[Guest]: kind of things that were happening.
[Guest]: So, all of that.
[Guest]: So,
[Guest]: I'll just give you,
[Guest]: so that was my India Today experience,
[Guest]: and it just left
[Guest]: me thinking about that,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: if you are in that organization,
[Guest]: and you just do your work,
[Guest]: you will,
[Guest]: and you,
[Guest]: mean, aap ek din ke liye chale jao,
[Guest]: aapko kuch dikhega nahi,
[Guest]: you'll see everything is normal.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: But it is in these day-to-day interactions,
[Guest]: when you see,
[Guest]: right,
[Guest]: a picture starts emerging.
[Guest]: Like, ek story ke liye mujhe bola,
[Guest]: and
[Guest]: they said, you know,
[Guest]: you partner with this political reporter.
[Guest]: And I've seen her work on TV.
[Guest]: She comes to me and says ki,
[Guest]: ki yeh story karna hai,
[Guest]: tumhe bataya hai kya,
[Guest]: what the story should say.
[Guest]: And I was like,
[Guest]: like,
[Guest]: this is not how reporting works.
[Guest]: Like,
[Guest]: we will find out.
[Guest]: They said,
[Guest]: me ki tumhe bataya hai kya.
[Guest]: So, then I felt again,
[Guest]: the same,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: this,
[Guest]: no, again,
[Guest]: I mean,
[Guest]: how can you call it idealism?
[Guest]: I'm just saying,
[Guest]: this just defies first principles.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: This is not how things happen.
[Guest]: And then,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: at the time,
[Guest]: I was reading this book by
[Guest]: Yanis Varoufakis
[Guest]: called Adults in the Room.
[Guest]: He was the Greek finance minister.
[Guest]: And you know,
[Guest]: that book is like,
[Guest]: one of my favorite books on politics,
[Guest]: because it's a tell-all memoir
[Guest]: from his days as a six-month
[Guest]: finance minister in Greece,
[Guest]: when the debt crisis was going on.
[Guest]: So, it's a beautiful book.
[Guest]: And in that,
[Guest]: he gave a frame,
[Guest]: which I think explained to me
[Guest]: what India today was.
[Guest]: So, you know,
[Unknown]: do you know Larry Summers?
[Unknown]: Yeah, of course.
[Unknown]: Larry Summers.
[Guest]: So, he asked Yanis in a private meeting.
[Guest]: And I think he also asked this
[Guest]: to Elizabeth Warren in the US,
[Guest]: that are you an insider or an outsider?
[Guest]: So, that's the frame
[Guest]: that Larry Summers poses.
[Guest]: So, and then he describes what insider.
[Guest]: So, this question is asked to Yanis.
[Guest]: I'm like,
[Unknown]: I don't have the exact words.
[Unknown]: Yeah, paraphrasing.
[Guest]: But his sense was this.
[Guest]: He says in a political system,
[Guest]: insiders are those,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: where you don't tell the outside world,
[Guest]: what insiders do.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: You keep it to yourself.
[Guest]: You have this privilege of information.
[Guest]: And the reward you get in exchange
[Guest]: is you get privileged access to information
[Guest]: and possibility to change things.
[Guest]: An outsider is the one
[Guest]: who does not respect these principles,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: And goes out and tells the world
[Guest]: what is happening.
[Guest]: But the cost is you will then be ignored.
[Unknown]: You know?
[Guest]: You know, the phrasing is not like,
[Guest]: if you read his exact word,
[Unknown]: it's beautiful.
[Guest]: But you get the sense, right?
[Unknown]: Yeah.
[Guest]: Insider, outsider,
[Guest]: that's a distinction.
[Guest]: And that day, Amit,
[Guest]: when I read that book,
[Guest]: so I just felt that
[Guest]: in the circle,
[Guest]: in the mainstream media,
[Guest]: it's not that,
[Guest]: again, maybe I'm being much empathetic to them,
[Guest]: but I didn't find them,
[Guest]: there's no conspiracy going on.
[Guest]: It's just that they're co-opted insiders,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: who feel that
[Guest]: by not picking battles,
[Guest]: by having access to
[Guest]: inside government machinery
[Guest]: and all of that,
[Guest]: something nice is happening.
[Guest]: That access, you know, we've talked about.
[Guest]: And that day I realized,
[Guest]: no, I don't know what I give up.
[Guest]: I'm fundamentally
[Guest]: I'm fundamentally an outsider
[Guest]: and I'm fine with it.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: So that is the distinction.
[Guest]: There's no conspiracy.
[Guest]: Then Yanis describes it further.
[Guest]: He says that, you know,
[Guest]: when you are in the structure,
[Guest]: in this political economy structure,
[Guest]: then you have three options.
[Guest]: Either
[Guest]: you are in that system
[Guest]: and you
[Guest]: see that, okay,
[Guest]: you know, you have some, say,
[Guest]: access to some privileged information.
[Guest]: Now you have two options,
[Guest]: either comply
[Guest]: or just exit.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: But you see, what happens by exiting?
[Guest]: So what you do,
[Guest]: that one person who has
[Guest]: some privileged information,
[Guest]: he goes to a second person
[Guest]: who has some privileged information.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: And then they talk together.
[Guest]: And then that cycle keeps repeating.
[Guest]: So within the insider network,
[Guest]: more networks start appearing.
[Guest]: And it's happening organically
[Guest]: because you just think that
[Guest]: why should I go out and do it?
[Guest]: Like I know something,
[Guest]: maybe I should tell it to someone else.
[Guest]: And that privileged networks
[Guest]: keep on building up.
[Guest]: There's a second person
[Guest]: who doesn't do this,
[Guest]: but they're too outside
[Guest]: in the inside,
[Guest]: they're on the periphery
[Guest]: that they can't even see,
[Guest]: you know, what kind of things
[Guest]: that are happening
[Guest]: in this black box.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: These are what I felt like
[Guest]: a lot of good
[Guest]: reporters at Indra today,
[Guest]: perhaps,
[Guest]: maybe they know,
[Guest]: maybe they don't know,
[Guest]: but they're like,
[Guest]: they're too insignificant
[Guest]: to have any say
[Guest]: in that whole business.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: So you stay in the periphery.
[Guest]: And the third
[Guest]: who just get out
[Guest]: and then they become irrelevant.
[Guest]: Then Yannis says there are few,
[Guest]: like Larry Sarkar,
[Guest]: Larry Summers,
[Guest]: who actually recognize
[Guest]: that this is a structure
[Guest]: in which they're operating.
[Guest]: So they can at least
[Guest]: place themselves.
[Guest]: But most people don't even know
[Guest]: that this power structure operates
[Guest]: where without any grand conspiracy,
[Guest]: where people in power
[Guest]: are sitting together
[Guest]: to think about,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: like what to do.
[Guest]: Organically,
[Guest]: things are happening.
[Guest]: And that for me was
[Guest]: such a good,
[Guest]: at least for me,
[Guest]: that, you know,
[Guest]: talked about incentives.
[Guest]: The incentive is just that
[Guest]: we have to run this organization.
[Guest]: We have to do this for that.
[Guest]: But you know,
[Guest]: these small actions
[Guest]: on a day-to-day basis,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: there's a compounding effect
[Guest]: where
[Guest]: the privilege networks
[Guest]: keeps on increasing
[Guest]: and your co-option just,
[Guest]: like then you're so seeped in,
[Guest]: you're so inside
[Guest]: that you don't even know
[Guest]: that you're trapped
[Guest]: in that structure.
[Guest]: So I think that,
[Guest]: when I saw,
[Guest]: that just explained
[Guest]: mainstream media to me
[Guest]: that this is happening,
[Guest]: but not my game.
[Guest]: Not my game.
[Guest]: Happily an outsider.
[Guest]: And
[Guest]: it's the age of the internet.
[Amit Varma]: Not my circus,
[Amit Varma]: not my monkeys.
[Amit Varma]: And these,
[Amit Varma]: I think these structures
[Amit Varma]: apply everywhere.
[Amit Varma]: Like I,
[Amit Varma]: you know,
[Amit Varma]: I think about,
[Amit Varma]: and this used to be a lament,
[Amit Varma]: that in every field
[Amit Varma]: that I have been a part of,
[Amit Varma]: even peripherally,
[Amit Varma]: I'm not an insider,
[Amit Varma]: of course,
[Amit Varma]: and I am sort of,
[Amit Varma]: and I'm on the outside,
[Amit Varma]: you know,
[Amit Varma]: so I'm not mainstream.
[Amit Varma]: The elites don't want me.
[Amit Varma]: And I realized
[Amit Varma]: after a point in time,
[Amit Varma]: that there is no point
[Unknown]: in trying to fit in,
[Unknown]: but instead it's better
[Amit Varma]: to find other misfits
[Amit Varma]: and, you know,
[Amit Varma]: have good conversations,
[Amit Varma]: which appears to be happening here.
[Amit Varma]: So,
[Amit Varma]: and by the way,
[Amit Varma]: speaking of lists,
[Amit Varma]: very funny list
[Amit Varma]: that I was part of.
[Amit Varma]: In 2009,
[Amit Varma]: Business Week magazine
[Amit Varma]: decided to do a list
[Amit Varma]: for the 50 most powerful people
[Amit Varma]: in India.
[Amit Varma]: Business Week magazine,
[Unknown]: 50 most powerful in India.
[Unknown]: So they would have been told
[Amit Varma]: to keep one new media person,
[Amit Varma]: and I was the biggest blogger
[Unknown]: at the time.
[Amit Varma]: So I was on that list
[Amit Varma]: and they had organized that list
[Amit Varma]: by alphabetical order of last name.
[Amit Varma]: So before me was Sachin Tendulkar
[Amit Varma]: and after me was Lalu Prasad Yadav.
[Unknown]: And I'm thinking that Sachin and Lalu
[Unknown]: will be looking at the list
[Unknown]: and thinking,
[Unknown]: Boss, who is this?
[Unknown]: Where did he come from?
[Guest]: What did you feel?
[Unknown]: I see,
[Unknown]: eat fulfilled every thin desire.
[Unknown]: I was happy,
[Unknown]: I didn't get any validation.
[Unknown]: You know,
[Unknown]: and a shitty book
[Unknown]: I had written had just come out.
[Unknown]: My publishers were super happy.
[Amit Varma]: They wanted to put it on the poster,
[Amit Varma]: one of India's 50 most powerful people.
[Unknown]: I stopped them.
[Unknown]: I said,
[Unknown]: it has no meaning.
[Unknown]: It's as meaningless as those,
[Amit Varma]: you know,
[Guest]: those social media anti-metrics.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: It's arbitrary.
[Guest]: It's random.
[Unknown]: It has no meaning.
[Unknown]: Which is why also these,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: Forbes 30 under 30
[Unknown]: and all of these things,
[Guest]: they're very arbitrary.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: And I think people,
[Guest]: like there's a friend of mine
[Guest]: who got into this list.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: And he was telling me,
[Guest]: yeah,
[Guest]: this is meaningless.
[Guest]: And you know,
[Guest]: you have to apply for,
[Guest]: I don't know if,
[Amit Varma]: application process.
[Amit Varma]: No,
[Amit Varma]: there was nothing for business.
[Guest]: It was a bolt from the blue for me.
[Guest]: Where will Tindulkar and Yadav apply?
[Guest]: So it's just,
[Guest]: I mean,
[Guest]: the more,
[Guest]: and I think,
[Guest]: I think once you see from the inside,
[Guest]: how these lists are created,
[Guest]: that there is no thought in it.
[Guest]: You know,
[Guest]: I think this whole thing about
[Guest]: being on the cover of a magazine,
[Guest]: et cetera,
[Guest]: you just realize that
[Guest]: these decisions are arbitrary.
[Amit Varma]: They're not,
[Amit Varma]: yeah,
[Amit Varma]: any reflection of anything.
[Amit Varma]: So I want to,
[Amit Varma]: you mentioned first principle thinking,
[Amit Varma]: and I want to
[Amit Varma]: apply that thinking
[Amit Varma]: to journalism itself
[Amit Varma]: and how newsrooms work,
[Amit Varma]: which you've written about eloquently.
[Amit Varma]: I'll link all your posts
[Amit Varma]: from the show notes.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the sort of,
[Amit Varma]: there are a couple of revelations there.
[Amit Varma]: And one is in something you describe
[Amit Varma]: about a newsroom
[Amit Varma]: and the other is in a question that you ask.
[Amit Varma]: And you describe a newsroom
[Amit Varma]: as essentially being in the content game.
[Amit Varma]: Producing content all the time.
[Amit Varma]: It's a content factory.
[Amit Varma]: And these days,
[Amit Varma]: as we see taking ideas from Twitter,
[Amit Varma]: Twitter,
[Amit Varma]: and it becomes,
[Amit Varma]: those become self-fulfilling prophecies.
[Amit Varma]: And the other is a question you asked
[Amit Varma]: at the start of the episode
[Amit Varma]: that you said,
[Amit Varma]: you asked yourself key.
[Amit Varma]: And I think you might've written about it
[Amit Varma]: in one of your posts as well.
[Amit Varma]: That what does journalism write about?
[Amit Varma]: What is news?
[Amit Varma]: You know,
[Amit Varma]: what is worth covering?
[Amit Varma]: Which is a great question to ask
[Amit Varma]: because there is a scarcity of space
[Amit Varma]: and a scarcity of attention,
[Amit Varma]: right?
[Amit Varma]: You can't take it for granted
[Amit Varma]: that these are the things
[Amit Varma]: we will cover and there'll be
[Amit Varma]: one page on this,
[Amit Varma]: one page on that.
[Amit Varma]: These are the specific stories
[Amit Varma]: we will cover.
[Amit Varma]: It's very facile
[Amit Varma]: once people are in that groove
[Amit Varma]: to go in those kinds of directions.
[Amit Varma]: But I'll ask you to step back
[Amit Varma]: because you've obviously thought
[Amit Varma]: about these first principles
[Amit Varma]: in some detail.
[Amit Varma]: What should a newsroom cover?
[Amit Varma]: What is driving it?
[Amit Varma]: If it was just supply and demand,
[Amit Varma]: you would always have
[Amit Varma]: like Prince falls into a well,
[Amit Varma]: army is there to rescue him.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know,
[Amit Varma]: it's a man bites dog all the time.
[Amit Varma]: But that's not it.
[Amit Varma]: There's more than supply and demand
[Amit Varma]: and even supply and demand
[Amit Varma]: is so often guesswork
[Amit Varma]: and thinking along predictable lines.
[Amit Varma]: So give me a sense
[Amit Varma]: of this fundamental basic
[Amit Varma]: and I understand
[Amit Varma]: it's a very large question,
[Amit Varma]: but what should a newsroom cover?
[Amit Varma]: You know, and at one level,
[Amit Varma]: that big meta question
[Amit Varma]: and at the other level,
[Amit Varma]: give me a sense of the state
[Amit Varma]: of the modern newsroom in India,
[Amit Varma]: because the whole system
[Amit Varma]: just seems to be broken,
[Amit Varma]: you know, in India today,
[Amit Varma]: of course, you've described
[Amit Varma]: a particular set of incentives
[Amit Varma]: in a particular kind
[Amit Varma]: of political context.
[Amit Varma]: But give me a sense of, you know,
[Amit Varma]: these two diametrically
[Amit Varma]: different things, you know,
[Amit Varma]: sort of how do you ask
[Amit Varma]: that philosophical question
[Amit Varma]: to begin with?
[Amit Varma]: And what are things like now?
[Guest]: So let me just try to see
[Guest]: how to articulate.
[Guest]: So I think let's just describe
[Guest]: the problem more clearly.
[Guest]: So this is sense of newsworthiness.
[Guest]: This is newsworthy.
[Guest]: I don't think any editor
[Guest]: in this country, new media, old media,
[Guest]: can they write a one page
[Guest]: 10 point description?
[Guest]: This is our mental model.
[Guest]: What is newsworthy?
[Guest]: I don't think anyone can write it.
[Guest]: Do you think that there are criteria?
[Guest]: What makes news?
[Guest]: What doesn't make news?
[Guest]: I don't think so.
[Amit Varma]: It's arbitrary.
[Amit Varma]: At best, you can come up
[Amit Varma]: with subjective criteria.
[Amit Varma]: That for me as an editor,
[Amit Varma]: this is what I feel
[Amit Varma]: our publication should cover.
[Guest]: But it's subjective and it's limited.
[Guest]: And also like a very subjective,
[Guest]: also like you can talk about,
[Guest]: like you say,
[Guest]: we want to cover education,
[Guest]: but the education we're like,
[Guest]: that's not, that's a topic.
[Guest]: I'm talking at the story level.
[Guest]: You know, this news,
[Guest]: what is newsworthy
[Guest]: is a very arbitrary construct.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: And I think the whole point,
[Guest]: when the idea of the mainstream existed,
[Guest]: and you have talked about in the show
[Guest]: that there's no mainstream
[Guest]: as such, if you think about it.
[Guest]: I mean, they have the power
[Guest]: of amplification,
[Guest]: but in the larger scheme of things,
[Guest]: right, like the literal meaning
[Guest]: of the word, you know.
[Guest]: So I'm saying that is the issue,
[Guest]: that newsworthiness,
[Guest]: I think is just a fundamentally
[Guest]: arbitrary construct.
[Guest]: And it's on the whims
[Guest]: and fancies of editors.
[Guest]: And what you expect in an ideal world
[Guest]: is you expect that
[Guest]: you respect the judgment
[Guest]: of the editor,
[Guest]: that, you know,
[Guest]: that the reason this person
[Guest]: is leading a publication
[Guest]: is because they have some sense
[Guest]: of what is important,
[Guest]: what is not important,
[Guest]: and that drives what is being covered.
[Guest]: Now, the challenge here is,
[Guest]: I think there's a framework
[Guest]: called the theory of interlocking public.
[Guest]: Have you heard of this term?
[Unknown]: No.
[Guest]: So the big picture of this frame
[Guest]: is that, see,
[Guest]: you talk about any particular issues,
[Guest]: and you talk about citizens.
[Guest]: Everyone is not going to be
[Guest]: interested in every issue.
[Guest]: Some people are interested in something
[Guest]: and they are completely ignorant
[Guest]: about something else.
[Guest]: And then the thing will change
[Guest]: in another context.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: So the way I think about
[Guest]: a lot of mainstream publications
[Guest]: is that they cater to the narrow elite
[Guest]: about what is interesting,
[Guest]: what is relevant.
[Guest]: So when you talk about political news,
[Guest]: you know, one of the things that, again,
[Guest]: I never understood the logic,
[Guest]: you know, reporters take so much pride
[Guest]: in quote-unquote,
[Guest]: in quote-unquote, breaking a story
[Guest]: that the government is anyway
[Guest]: going to tell you two days later.
[Guest]: And you say,
[Guest]: there's nothing that they're hiding.
[Guest]: It's just that you read this first in X.
[Guest]: So I never understood that.
[Guest]: So what?
[Guest]: Agar aapne mujhe do din pehle bata diya.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: Like insignificant thing.
[Guest]: It's not enhancing my understanding.
[Guest]: But that is what the newsroom incentivizes.
[Guest]: You know, when they say,
[Guest]: we want exclusive,
[Guest]: we want scoops.
[Guest]: So what I like is that information
[Guest]: that will anyway come out
[Guest]: in the public sphere, na?
[Guest]: Everyone will get it, but you...
[Guest]: So I'm saying this,
[Guest]: but this is a metric of newsworthiness
[Guest]: that we have it first, incentives.
[Guest]: So this journalism professor,
[Guest]: I think, Jay Rosen in the US,
[Guest]: he gave this very good statement.
[Guest]: He said,
[Guest]: the modern media ecosystem
[Guest]: is not designed
[Guest]: to enhance public understanding.
[Guest]: It is enhanced to manufacture new content.
[Guest]: And he included the big public media
[Guest]: in the big publications.
[Guest]: So that way,
[Guest]: that's a description of the problem
[Guest]: that I would want as a reader,
[Guest]: that I just,
[Guest]: I want to understand India better.
[Guest]: I want to understand this government better.
[Guest]: But you get into...
[Guest]: And you can't even say that
[Guest]: the stories that are being reported
[Guest]: are irrelevant.
[Guest]: But I think that what has happened
[Guest]: is that at least now that I'm outside
[Guest]: and I read,
[Guest]: you feel so alienated.
[Guest]: That you know, okay, like,
[Guest]: toh like aap main kya karoon?
[Unknown]: You know?
[Guest]: And the conflicting part here is that,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: sometimes there's a friend of mine,
[Guest]: very good journalist,
[Guest]: he said,
[Guest]: sometimes we write the story
[Guest]: because we just want
[Guest]: that person in the RBI
[Guest]: to know that, you know,
[Guest]: we have written this
[Guest]: so that a change happens.
[Guest]: You know, they have this in the head
[Guest]: that this story is written
[Guest]: for certain people.
[Guest]: Right?
[Unknown]: So,
[Guest]: the answer that
[Guest]: what a newspaper ought to do,
[Guest]: I have never been able to do
[Guest]: I have never been able to
[Guest]: crack this answer that,
[Guest]: ki like if I am,
[Guest]: I'm asked to write guidelines,
[Guest]: kaise likhenge?
[Guest]: Like, remember the conference
[Guest]: we were talking about the CRISPR?
[Unknown]: Yeah.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: So CRISPR,
[Guest]: like just for context
[Guest]: for those who don't know,
[Guest]: revolutionary technology in gene editing.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: People should read about it
[Guest]: and understand that
[Guest]: something big is happening
[Guest]: that can change
[Guest]: how human evolution happens.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: It's not like it's,
[Guest]: like tax policy changes,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: once in a while, you know?
[Guest]: This you're talking about
[Amit Varma]: something big.
[Amit Varma]: I had an episode on it
[Amit Varma]: with Shambhavi Naik,
[Guest]: I'll link that from the show notes.
[Guest]: But,
[Guest]: on a day-to-day basis,
[Guest]: we,
[Guest]: most people would be unaware, right?
[Guest]: So I'm saying
[Guest]: if there is a theory of importance,
[Guest]: what matters,
[Guest]: what does not matter?
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: Does this not matter?
[Guest]: So I'm saying this is a way
[Guest]: that I pose a question.
[Guest]: Right? That okay,
[Guest]: what is happening?
[Guest]: And in the theory of interlocking public,
[Guest]: that was the point that
[Guest]: how do you even come up
[Guest]: with a list of topics
[Guest]: that cater to the masses?
[Guest]: Because,
[Guest]: there is no one public.
[Guest]: The public is so disaggregated.
[Guest]: They have so much
[Guest]: disaggregated interests.
[Guest]: So,
[Guest]: I don't know the answer to the question
[Guest]: that what a newsroom should cover.
[Guest]: I think of it as a different way
[Guest]: that you,
[Guest]: when I say first principles,
[Guest]: it's more about that
[Guest]: when you have a story,
[Guest]: you know?
[Guest]: At least that's how I think about my work.
[Guest]: You think about, okay,
[Guest]: why does it matter?
[Guest]: Story, you know,
[Guest]: how does it matter?
[Guest]: And you report it vigorously
[Guest]: and make it relevant.
[Guest]: It's not that every story you read
[Guest]: has to have some actionable.
[Guest]: Like,
[Guest]: do you know what was his name?
[Guest]: Aaron Schwartz.
[Guest]: You know, the,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: the internet's own boy.
[Guest]: That's a great documentary,
[Guest]: which,
[Guest]: like, really moved me.
[Guest]: But he was this young hacker
[Guest]: in the US,
[Guest]: very politically active,
[Guest]: but also,
[Guest]: I think he co-founded Reddit.
[Guest]: Reddit, yes,
[Guest]: I think he did.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So, he committed suicide
[Guest]: because of this whole
[Guest]: JSTOR thing about academic papers.
[Guest]: So, he had a great blog.
[Guest]: It's still online.
[Guest]: And he wrote a piece
[Guest]: about why he doesn't read the news.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, he's a guy who got prosecuted,
[Amit Varma]: I think, for putting up
[Guest]: JSTOR papers online for free.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: Very sad, very sad.
[Guest]: Very sad, right?
[Guest]: So, I was reading his blog
[Guest]: and I thought,
[Guest]: ki boss,
[Guest]: this guy,
[Guest]: if you look at his politics,
[Guest]: like,
[Guest]: day in, day out,
[Guest]: this guy is making political change.
[Guest]: He's thinking about politics.
[Guest]: And he has a post on his website,
[Guest]: I don't read the news
[Guest]: because news is irrelevant
[Guest]: to what I do.
[Guest]: He says,
[Guest]: I open the page
[Guest]: and I say,
[Guest]: this is happening,
[Guest]: that is happening.
[Guest]: But he says,
[Guest]: I don't know where I fit in.
[Guest]: You know, I can't relate.
[Guest]: He says, okay,
[Guest]: you know, something bad
[Guest]: is happening at that place.
[Guest]: So, like,
[Guest]: so he felt that
[Guest]: I don't feel the agency
[Guest]: that these bad things are happening,
[Guest]: but what can I do?
[Guest]: So, I'm saying that is one frame of reference
[Guest]: where someone can say,
[Guest]: so what I'm,
[Guest]: so I can,
[Guest]: it's going in,
[Guest]: I'm meandering,
[Guest]: but the point I'm trying to make is that
[Guest]: everything that largely we are seeing,
[Guest]: you can poke holes on why
[Guest]: the way we currently think
[Guest]: has big issues.
[Guest]: Okay, it's broken.
[Guest]: And there is no solution
[Guest]: that you can say,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: if Samarth Mansal is tomorrow,
[Guest]: the editor of a paper,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: I am not saying that
[Guest]: I have an answer that
[Guest]: I am going to fix it.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: Because the,
[Guest]: because this,
[Guest]: the fundamental assumption is that
[Guest]: something deserves to be news
[Guest]: and something does not
[Guest]: deserve to be news.
[Guest]: I don't think that distinction is relevant,
[Guest]: but on a day-to-day basis,
[Guest]: whatever you are covering,
[Guest]: right, and how you report
[Guest]: and how you tell a story,
[Guest]: I think that is where I feel
[Guest]: that you can list down rules,
[Guest]: that at least whatever you are doing
[Guest]: and what are the things
[Guest]: that have no meaning,
[Guest]: you can remove that,
[Guest]: where you say,
[Guest]: and just experiment
[Guest]: and you know,
[Guest]: tell better stories.
[Guest]: I don't know if that
[Guest]: answers your question,
[Guest]: but I'm saying,
[Guest]: for me,
[Guest]: what matters is
[Guest]: what stories I choose.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I don't think this show
[Amit Varma]: is really about answering questions,
[Amit Varma]: but more just
[Amit Varma]: finding questions,
[Amit Varma]: finding better questions to ask
[Amit Varma]: and kind of understanding
[Unknown]: those questions a little better.
[Unknown]: And you know,
[Unknown]: for something like this,
[Amit Varma]: I think that
[Amit Varma]: there's no definitive answer
[Amit Varma]: to what you should cover.
[Amit Varma]: And the ideal way
[Amit Varma]: is let a thousand flowers bloom.
[Amit Varma]: Absolutely.
[Amit Varma]: Let, you know,
[Amit Varma]: multitudes of people
[Amit Varma]: get in there,
[Amit Varma]: do their own kind of reporting,
[Amit Varma]: and each thing
[Amit Varma]: will find its own audience.
[Amit Varma]: And that's what you kind of want.
[Amit Varma]: But you are right
[Amit Varma]: that there's a need
[Amit Varma]: to think about processes
[Amit Varma]: and to avoid certain traps.
[Amit Varma]: Like one trap
[Amit Varma]: that you pointed out
[Amit Varma]: was, you know,
[Amit Varma]: the distinction between
[Amit Varma]: events and systems.
[Amit Varma]: And you pointed out
[Amit Varma]: that a lot of news reporting,
[Amit Varma]: if not pretty much all of it,
[Amit Varma]: is focused around events.
[Amit Varma]: Kuch hua, yeh hua, usse report karo.
[Amit Varma]: And it's,
[Amit Varma]: and all of it is like that.
[Amit Varma]: And they don't really contribute
[Amit Varma]: to public understanding
[Amit Varma]: to use Jay Rosen's words,
[Unknown]: like you said.
[Amit Varma]: You know,
[Amit Varma]: so just elaborate a little bit
[Amit Varma]: on, you know,
[Amit Varma]: thinking in systems
[Amit Varma]: and thinking in
[Guest]: just in terms of events.
[Guest]: Sure.
[Guest]: So again, I think
[Guest]: rather than talking in abstract,
[Guest]: let's be concrete.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: In 2018,
[Guest]: there was a story
[Guest]: which made a lot of headlines,
[Guest]: which was that
[Guest]: this current government
[Guest]: has got powers for surveillance,
[Guest]: which are significant.
[Guest]: You know, now
[Guest]: data from your phone
[Guest]: will be with the government,
[Guest]: all of those kinds of things,
[Guest]: because there was one circular
[Guest]: that came out in the Home Ministry.
[Guest]: The Hindu carried something small
[Guest]: in the inside page.
[Guest]: But next day,
[Guest]: that blew on the internet.
[Guest]: Oh my God,
[Guest]: what is this government doing?
[Guest]: Modi is coming after your phones,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: Again, I don't know
[Guest]: what happened with the Hindu,
[Guest]: but it was probably
[Guest]: some notification came
[Guest]: and some reporter wrote a copy
[Guest]: without deep context
[Guest]: and people misinterpreted
[Guest]: what had happened.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: TV pe halla ho raha hai,
[Guest]: Twitter pe halla ho raha hai,
[Guest]: all of these things are happening.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: Then,
[Guest]: because I was covering
[Guest]: tech policy at the time,
[Guest]: like I made phone calls.
[Guest]: Okay, what is this?
[Guest]: So this is an event
[Guest]: which triggered
[Guest]: a conversation around
[Guest]: privacy and surveillance,
[Guest]: which is an important topic.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: But the problem was
[Guest]: everyone was talking about,
[Guest]: and this is my understanding,
[Guest]: about a non-existing issue
[Guest]: because, Amit,
[Guest]: nothing had changed.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: What, there was no new power.
[Guest]: The power,
[Guest]: jo bhi tha,
[Guest]: it was the existing system.
[Guest]: It was just that circular,
[Guest]: which was some formality.
[Guest]: How I knew?
[Guest]: Because I made phone calls.
[Guest]: I called experts
[Guest]: who covered that.
[Guest]: I said, look,
[Guest]: this thing has come,
[Guest]: you have written about it.
[Guest]: Can you please help me
[Guest]: understand what has changed?
[Guest]: I called three people,
[Guest]: a lawyer,
[Guest]: someone at a law firm,
[Guest]: someone at a think tank.
[Guest]: That was a unanimous answer.
[Guest]: So I,
[Guest]: and then, you know,
[Guest]: a colleague of mine
[Guest]: who had connections in the MHA,
[Guest]: he got like an inside person.
[Guest]: And I think that is the way
[Guest]: to do a story.
[Guest]: You cover all aspects.
[Guest]: So I went and
[Guest]: explained,
[Guest]: ki boss,
[Guest]: there is no,
[Guest]: like, there's nothing here,
[Guest]: like there's no story.
[Guest]: The story is that it's just,
[Guest]: so this event
[Guest]: was the point of coverage,
[Guest]: but in the larger level,
[Guest]: nothing had changed.
[Guest]: So what,
[Guest]: and I'll tell you
[Guest]: how it connects to processes.
[Guest]: In the press,
[Guest]: this issue was reported as
[Guest]: Congress versus BJP.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: That opposition is saying
[Guest]: how bad
[Guest]: BJP is doing this.
[Guest]: Then you get some context.
[Guest]: When 2008 or 9,
[Guest]: when the IT Act was passed,
[Guest]: okay,
[Guest]: Congress was in power,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: And they passed
[Guest]: what people were,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: gali galoching on the internet.
[Unknown]: And this law,
[Guest]: I think IT Act passed
[Guest]: in 10 minutes in the parliament.
[Guest]: Kuch debate bhi nahi hua.
[Guest]: Because you know what?
[Guest]: Surveillance is about power.
[Guest]: It is not about
[Guest]: party A versus party B.
[Guest]: Everyone in power
[Guest]: wants to,
[Guest]: does not want your life to be private.
[Guest]: That's how this power works.
[Guest]: Now,
[Guest]: Congress,
[Guest]: who was in power at that time,
[Guest]: is now taking the moral authority,
[Guest]: ki yeh galat kar rahe hain,
[Guest]: jab ki kuch change hi nahi hua hai.
[Unknown]: Juki yeh Congress hi nahi kiya hai.
[Unknown]: Congress nahi kiya hai,
[Unknown]: right?
[Unknown]: And the others were,
[Guest]: ki everyone wants this,
[Guest]: because everyone benefits,
[Guest]: in a way.
[Guest]: But,
[Guest]: you look at the news coverage,
[Guest]: that was the story.
[Guest]: Congress said this,
[Guest]: BJP said this.
[Guest]: This is what I am describing.
[Guest]: And you know,
[Guest]: I was so sad,
[Guest]: because my story,
[Guest]: andar page pe tha.
[Guest]: Yeh nothing has changed.
[Guest]: Front page pe story tha,
[Guest]: Congress says this,
[Guest]: BJP says this.
[Guest]: So,
[Guest]: that day I could not understand,
[Guest]: when,
[Guest]: how can my paper,
[Guest]: publish a story saying,
[Guest]: andar,
[Guest]: yeh nothing has changed.
[Guest]: Or front page pe,
[Guest]: you are amplifying,
[Guest]: Congress, BJP.
[Guest]: So, this is the problem
[Guest]: with event-based reporting.
[Guest]: Where you don't know,
[Guest]: at a system level,
[Guest]: you know what is happening.
[Guest]: At a,
[Guest]: when you look at a system,
[Guest]: on a day-to-day basis,
[Guest]: for example,
[Guest]: there is a stock market crash.
[Guest]: You know,
[Guest]: an oil price,
[Guest]: rises.
[Guest]: You know,
[Guest]: cryptocurrency,
[Guest]: something is happening.
[Guest]: Or there is a flood there.
[Guest]: All of those things.
[Guest]: So, you report on the event.
[Guest]: But,
[Guest]: the question about,
[Guest]: why was there a flood in Bihar?
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: What are the day-to-day things,
[Guest]: that have happened in the past,
[Guest]: 5 years,
[Guest]: that led to that flood?
[Guest]: That is a system.
[Guest]: That's a process.
[Guest]: That's not an event.
[Guest]: And that unfolds,
[Guest]: on a day-to-day basis.
[Guest]: You need to know,
[Guest]: you need to really understand.
[Guest]: You need to connect the dots.
[Guest]: You need to look at multiple perspectives.
[Guest]: And that is the story.
[Guest]: The story is not,
[Guest]: in fact,
[Guest]: P Sainath,
[Guest]: in his book,
[Guest]: Everybody Loves a Good Drought.
[Guest]: He talks about this distinction in,
[Guest]: back,
[Guest]: like,
[Guest]: I think he wrote his book in the 90s.
[Amit Varma]: Sometime around that time.
[Guest]: He describes this,
[Guest]: this exact,
[Guest]: in,
[Guest]: I don't know if he used these words.
[Guest]: Exactly that,
[Guest]: that how,
[Guest]: we look at incidents in isolation.
[Guest]: And that,
[Guest]: to us feels,
[Guest]: something wrong is happening.
[Guest]: But we have not looked at,
[Guest]: the deeper reasons,
[Guest]: why we went there.
[Guest]: And to get to this whole process,
[Guest]: you can use,
[Guest]: systems thinking approach,
[Guest]: which is just one way of looking at things.
[Guest]: And the core idea there is that,
[Guest]: like,
[Guest]: even when you're looking at the media,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: I,
[Guest]: talk to so many people who says,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: there's this idea that,
[Guest]: if only good people come together,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: Amit Verma,
[Guest]: Samarth Mansal,
[Guest]: and 20 of us,
[Guest]: come together and we are given some money.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: And we will start an organization.
[Guest]: We will fix things.
[Guest]: No,
[Guest]: because we are not operating in isolation.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: You can say,
[Guest]: the problem is,
[Guest]: the proprietor,
[Guest]: the owner is the problem.
[Guest]: So you will say,
[Guest]: change the owner.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: No.
[Guest]: What about other incentives that drive news coverage?
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: What,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: the reporter wants to win awards.
[Guest]: The reporter wants his colleagues,
[Guest]: to say,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: you are a good reporter.
[Guest]: You know,
[Guest]: you,
[Guest]: all of those things,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: I'm saying,
[Guest]: in every action,
[Guest]: there is no,
[Guest]: there is no, that this is one piece of the system that is broken.
[Guest]: Once you look at the big picture,
[Guest]: and instead of looking at incidents in isolation,
[Guest]: you say,
[Guest]: okay,
[Guest]: how is the system interacting with each other?
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: And how,
[Guest]: a small change,
[Guest]: in incident X,
[Guest]: makes a big change in Y.
[Guest]: Then you see the complexity of the system and you realize that,
[Guest]: the problem is much more complicated.
[Guest]: You can't just,
[Guest]: fix one part,
[Guest]: and think that,
[Guest]: fix it 10 times in isolation,
[Guest]: the system will,
[Guest]: does that make sense?
[Guest]: In a way that,
[Guest]: about the process that,
[Guest]: it's not just one event.
[Guest]: Because if you just look at event,
[Guest]: in that whole system,
[Guest]: you're looking at X.
[Guest]: You've forgotten,
[Guest]: how we got to X.
[Guest]: And that is the story,
[Guest]: not X.
[Guest]: Because that will always give you a very limited picture.
[Guest]: And Amit,
[Guest]: you open a paper any day,
[Guest]: you'll find it,
[Amit Varma]: Event,
[Amit Varma]: event,
[Unknown]: event,
[Unknown]: event.
[Unknown]: So you read the event,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: you go to a party,
[Guest]: you will sound smart because you know.
[Guest]: But,
[Guest]: the question is,
[Guest]: do you understand things better?
[Guest]: Has your understanding about,
[Guest]: Indian politics,
[Guest]: policy,
[Guest]: has that,
[Guest]: enhanced?
[Guest]: As a reader,
[Guest]: not for me,
[Guest]: I have a lot of friends who don't,
[Guest]: maybe there are people who are,
[Guest]: but I don't think,
[Guest]: that knowing tidbits and trivia,
[Guest]: you can know a lot of them,
[Guest]: and you can keep throwing that at people.
[Guest]: But,
[Guest]: base level pay,
[Guest]: what,
[Guest]: like what have you understood?
[Guest]: So that,
[Guest]: that's a common problem,
[Guest]: and it's not an India problem.
[Guest]: That's a global problem about,
[Guest]: the idea of news itself.
[Guest]: So my,
[Guest]: and,
[Guest]: again,
[Guest]: if you talk at the centuries level,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: Like news is not,
[Guest]: like it didn't appear in nature,
[Guest]: it's like what,
[Guest]: 400 years old or something,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: We are living in a different,
[Guest]: information environment,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: The internet has come,
[Guest]: a lot of things are happening.
[Guest]: So I am at that zone where I,
[Guest]: understand,
[Guest]: why newspapers exist,
[Guest]: why the idea of news exists.
[Guest]: But you also have to think that,
[Guest]: you know the,
[Guest]: like my reference frame now is that boss,
[Guest]: I care a lot about journalism,
[Guest]: which is why we are even having this conversation.
[Guest]: So think about the first principles of journalism,
[Guest]: like if newspapers die,
[Guest]: let them die.
[Guest]: You know,
[Guest]: I'll feel bad because,
[Guest]: all of our institutions,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: they have history,
[Guest]: they matter,
[Guest]: they have something to this country.
[Guest]: But,
[Guest]: in the longer,
[Guest]: larger scheme of things,
[Guest]: you want journalism to stay,
[Guest]: not,
[Guest]: an entity called a newspaper,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: And I think we are at the time where,
[Guest]: no one knows the answer,
[Guest]: ki,
[Guest]: what is going to happen,
[Guest]: in the future.
[Guest]: And everyone is trying to figure it out,
[Guest]: and we should take solace in the fact that,
[Guest]: we don't know the answer.
[Guest]: But we should work towards the future.
[Guest]: So at least,
[Guest]: now after giving all this,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: big theory,
[Guest]: what matters is what I do.
[Guest]: And that is the frame in which I operate.
[Guest]: Ki,
[Guest]: I don't know what others are doing,
[Guest]: but,
[Guest]: not,
[Guest]: news,
[Guest]: not newspapers,
[Guest]: journalism.
[Guest]: And there's a difference.
[Guest]: Journalism and news are not the same.
[Guest]: News is a sub-component of journalism.
[Guest]: And I think if we make that distinction,
[Guest]: it just gives a better frame to think about the solutions.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah,
[Amit Varma]: and you mentioned reading newspapers and going to parties,
[Amit Varma]: and I don't either.
[Amit Varma]: So,
[Amit Varma]: you know,
[Amit Varma]: I don't take a newspaper and no one calls me to parties.
[Amit Varma]: So,
[Amit Varma]: just,
[Amit Varma]: elaborate on the last thing you said there,
[Amit Varma]: that there is more to journalism than news.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So news is something that's recent, right?
[Guest]: News is something that happened today.
[Guest]: But what is like,
[Guest]: again,
[Guest]: I can keep,
[Guest]: I have such an irritation with,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: this whole thing about newsworthiness,
[Guest]: what it is.
[Guest]: It's an,
[Guest]: like,
[Guest]: it doesn't give you the full picture of,
[Guest]: what is happening.
[Guest]: It's just,
[Guest]: some non-random sample of collection of events that have happened.
[Guest]: And given to you,
[Guest]: with a very deep bias about,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: there's negativity,
[Guest]: there is some outrage.
[Guest]: Sometimes it's important,
[Guest]: some civic role,
[Guest]: all of those things.
[Guest]: That is,
[Guest]: and it's important.
[Guest]: I've written my,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: in my writing that,
[Guest]: as a collective,
[Guest]: if all of this goes away,
[Guest]: we will lose an important part of our information sphere.
[Guest]: But journalism is more than that.
[Guest]: For me,
[Guest]: honestly,
[Guest]: Amit,
[Guest]: again,
[Guest]: journalism for me has,
[Guest]: is no more about making an impact,
[Guest]: or making a change.
[Guest]: I only think journalism is a vehicle for truth-seeking,
[Guest]: to understand.
[Guest]: That's it,
[Guest]: nothing else.
[Guest]: And there,
[Guest]: when you talk about,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: when we say deep reportage,
[Guest]: what is deep reportage?
[Guest]: There, where you don't settle for easy answers,
[Guest]: you keep,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: as I think,
[Guest]: who,
[Guest]: who is that editor?
[Guest]: I've said,
[Guest]: keep peeling the onion,
[Guest]: you know.
[Guest]: And,
[Guest]: I'm not even saying investigative reporting.
[Guest]: I'm not even saying that.
[Guest]: I'm saying journalism,
[Guest]: news is about what happened yesterday,
[Guest]: and we want to report,
[Guest]: so that you are informed about current events.
[Guest]: Journalism is about truth-seeking.
[Guest]: Journalism is about understanding,
[Guest]: you know.
[Guest]: And,
[Guest]: there are so many ways to understand the world.
[Guest]: You can be,
[Guest]: you can become a scientist.
[Guest]: But I think that,
[Guest]: there's a power,
[Guest]: in the profession of journalism,
[Guest]: which others,
[Guest]: other,
[Guest]: like,
[Guest]: you can be at a think tank,
[Guest]: you could be a scientist.
[Guest]: The things that a journalist can do that you can't.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: For example,
[Guest]: like I was at this conference,
[Guest]: and people were telling me about,
[Guest]: the problems with Indian think tanks.
[Guest]: Like, you know how,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: they've been co-op,
[Guest]: like,
[Guest]: they're not free anymore in a way,
[Guest]: like there's some decline.
[Guest]: So, when I asked this person,
[Guest]: this is so important,
[Guest]: can you talk about it in public?
[Guest]: And they said,
[Guest]: no, it's too risky.
[Guest]: I can't.
[Guest]: So, Amit,
[Guest]: I am not doing anything right now,
[Guest]: but it's in my notes.
[Guest]: I'm like, okay,
[Guest]: that's a story.
[Guest]: But this is one person telling me this.
[Guest]: In the back of my head,
[Guest]: I don't know if I'll write it.
[Guest]: But in my ideas,
[Guest]: it's a story that,
[Guest]: this person can't say this because,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: the society may alienate this person,
[Guest]: right, whatever.
[Guest]: But it's a,
[Guest]: it's a process about how,
[Guest]: knowledge production in India has been affected.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: Am I convinced?
[Guest]: No, because this one person told me,
[Guest]: but someone I trust has told me this,
[Guest]: in private.
[Guest]: So, can I use a journalistic method,
[Guest]: to find out and connect the dots
[Guest]: and talk to 10 people?
[Guest]: And I take the risk,
[Guest]: in the sense of,
[Guest]: to be the person,
[Guest]: who brings this to the information sphere,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: The journalistic,
[Guest]: the people,
[Guest]: journalists take the risk.
[Guest]: We name people,
[Guest]: about this organization.
[Guest]: We, you know,
[Guest]: academics generally talk in broad brush strokes.
[Guest]: You know,
[Guest]: this happens,
[Guest]: that happens.
[Guest]: I think,
[Guest]: journalism,
[Guest]: we talk in specifics.
[Guest]: We name people.
[Guest]: We are not saying,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: X person is doing something with their taxes.
[Guest]: We say,
[Guest]: this person did this,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: Now you can say,
[Guest]: there's bias in this,
[Guest]: etc.
[Guest]: No,
[Guest]: but I'm saying,
[Guest]: the mechanism of accountability,
[Guest]: the mechanism of that,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: like we take risk and we have the right to offend,
[Guest]: and then we write and report.
[Guest]: And then I think the society should,
[Guest]: give us like,
[Guest]: if we are taking that risk,
[Guest]: they should insure us.
[Guest]: So I think that's a social contract.
[Guest]: That's one example where I say that,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: this is not news because,
[Guest]: it's not something that,
[Guest]: today something happened,
[Guest]: like,
[Guest]: someone will be fired at a think tank.
[Guest]: It will become an event.
[Guest]: But news comes and goes,
[Guest]: in one week it dies.
[Guest]: But what did you learn?
[Guest]: About the country.
[Guest]: So that's why I think journalism,
[Guest]: in that way I'm saying,
[Guest]: that's the difference.
[Guest]: That's one way,
[Guest]: I think it's much bigger than news rather than.
[Amit Varma]: And what I find resonant in what you're saying,
[Amit Varma]: is the distinction that you're making,
[Amit Varma]: though not in so many words,
[Amit Varma]: but this is me thinking aloud,
[Amit Varma]: between the essence of an act and the packaging of it.
[Unknown]: Right?
[Unknown]: For example,
[Unknown]: I often tell,
[Amit Varma]: you know,
[Amit Varma]: people will object to e-readers,
[Amit Varma]: for example,
[Unknown]: and say,
[Unknown]: no,
[Amit Varma]: the book should be physical,
[Amit Varma]: the paper should smell like,
[Amit Varma]: this will smell like this,
[Amit Varma]: this will smell like that.
[Amit Varma]: And my point is,
[Amit Varma]: a book is a words an author writes,
[Amit Varma]: that,
[Amit Varma]: you know,
[Amit Varma]: your paperback and your hardcovers,
[Amit Varma]: they are forms of packaging,
[Amit Varma]: your Kindle is a form of packaging,
[Amit Varma]: you know,
[Amit Varma]: those are all different forms of packaging.
[Amit Varma]: Similarly,
[Amit Varma]: if you strip down the essence of journalism,
[Amit Varma]: to the pursuit of truth,
[Amit Varma]: to making sense of the world,
[Amit Varma]: then we have some antiquated forms of packaging,
[Amit Varma]: which kind of linger on,
[Amit Varma]: like newspapers and TV channels and whatever,
[Amit Varma]: and some of them will become artifacts.
[Amit Varma]: And some of them will morph into other things.
[Amit Varma]: But those are not important.
[Amit Varma]: What is important is the thing itself,
[Amit Varma]: the pursuit of truth,
[Amit Varma]: the desire to understand the world.
[Amit Varma]: And a long form podcast can contribute to that as much as,
[Unknown]: you know,
[Amit Varma]: a pamphlet can,
[Unknown]: for example,
[Unknown]: from the past.
[Amit Varma]: So I think that's an important sort of distinction.
[Amit Varma]: I mean,
[Amit Varma]: for example,
[Amit Varma]: when people talk of tech monopolies,
[Amit Varma]: Facebook has no competition,
[Amit Varma]: Twitter has no competition.
[Amit Varma]: Actually,
[Amit Varma]: if you think about it,
[Amit Varma]: they all do.
[Amit Varma]: You know,
[Amit Varma]: in a narrow sense,
[Amit Varma]: they're monopolies of whatever specific domain they operate in.
[Amit Varma]: But in a broader sense,
[Amit Varma]: they're all competing for our time.
[Unknown]: They're all competing for our attention,
[Amit Varma]: right?
[Amit Varma]: And if you,
[Amit Varma]: so it's,
[Amit Varma]: I think at some level,
[Amit Varma]: sometimes when we think about all of these things,
[Amit Varma]: just as it helps to embody the abstract and give it concrete shape,
[Amit Varma]: it also helps,
[Amit Varma]: I think,
[Amit Varma]: to step back and look at the bigger picture.
[Amit Varma]: You know,
[Amit Varma]: you might do it in terms of time,
[Amit Varma]: look at something over 500 years instead of the last 30 years,
[Amit Varma]: or you might do it in terms of asking,
[Amit Varma]: what is the need this thing is,
[Amit Varma]: you know,
[Unknown]: fulfilling?
[Unknown]: And a need that today,
[Amit Varma]: you know,
[Amit Varma]: an HD or an India today was fulfilling say in 1990.
[Amit Varma]: Those needs are not being fulfilled by those institutions today.
[Amit Varma]: Those needs,
[Amit Varma]: if you think about it,
[Amit Varma]: have been completely taken over.
[Amit Varma]: You could argue that they are,
[Amit Varma]: you know,
[Amit Varma]: in some cases,
[Amit Varma]: they have become event management firms,
[Amit Varma]: like,
[Amit Varma]: you know,
[Amit Varma]: political journalists asked to invite politicians to events.
[Amit Varma]: In other cases,
[Amit Varma]: they have become sources of entertainment,
[Unknown]: where,
[Amit Varma]: you know,
[Amit Varma]: all of these events are what they're entertaining.
[Amit Varma]: They're not necessarily casting light on the world.
[Amit Varma]: So I agree with you that I'm hopeful that in a future of unknown unknowns,
[Amit Varma]: different kinds of solutions will emerge.
[Amit Varma]: What I,
[Amit Varma]: another thing I want to focus on is that so far in our conversation,
[Amit Varma]: I've been,
[Amit Varma]: you know,
[Amit Varma]: critical,
[Amit Varma]: or maybe critical in an understanding way of a mainstream media,
[Amit Varma]: which almost cows down before,
[Amit Varma]: you know,
[Amit Varma]: the powers that be.
[Amit Varma]: And,
[Amit Varma]: and I almost seem to be valorizing independent media,
[Unknown]: which is standing up and saying,
[Unknown]: we shall fight.
[Amit Varma]: But the interesting thing is in modern times,
[Amit Varma]: a lot of what passes for journalism is really narrative battles.
[Amit Varma]: Absolutely.
[Amit Varma]: And even within,
[Amit Varma]: you know,
[Amit Varma]: the so-called independent media,
[Amit Varma]: what journalists and editors need to watch out for is they need to introspect
[Amit Varma]: and think about whether they themselves have agendas,
[Amit Varma]: whether there's a danger of politics kind of getting in the way of that,
[Amit Varma]: you know,
[Amit Varma]: you wrote a long and lovely critical essay of a story broken by the wire a while back,
[Amit Varma]: where they perhaps,
[Amit Varma]: you know,
[Amit Varma]: allowed their desire to break a particular kind of story to cloud their better judgment about
[Amit Varma]: whether the story warranted to be published.
[Amit Varma]: You've also,
[Amit Varma]: you know,
[Amit Varma]: criticized the caravan in the past,
[Amit Varma]: and I have deep critiques of them.
[Amit Varma]: I appreciate their courage,
[Amit Varma]: but I feel that a lot of what they do,
[Amit Varma]: I wouldn't call it journalism,
[Amit Varma]: you know, a lot of their profiles are really hit pieces,
[Amit Varma]: where they have decided the conclusion in advance that we're going to take person X down.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know,
[Amit Varma]: and everything is sort of mediated towards that.
[Amit Varma]: So what are your thoughts on this?
[Guest]: Yeah, I have.
[Guest]: Okay, I'll tell you.
[Guest]: But just,
[Guest]: I just want to add a note to everything I've said.
[Guest]: And I mean,
[Guest]: I think I mostly have questions at this time,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: I don't have answers.
[Guest]: I mean,
[Guest]: I hope I mean,
[Guest]: I mean, this is a kind of a conversation where all sorts of meandering is happening,
[Guest]: but I hope you can see that.
[Amit Varma]: I think it's a freewheeling conversation,
[Amit Varma]: which listeners on the show,
[Amit Varma]: of the show,
[Amit Varma]: at least,
[Amit Varma]: yeah,
[Amit Varma]: will take in the right spirit.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, because,
[Guest]: yeah, I'm like,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: I say,
[Guest]: I'm the most qualified expert on nothing.
[Guest]: I don't know, man,
[Guest]: but it's just that,
[Guest]: I think,
[Guest]: but it's important to ask these questions.
[Guest]: Yeah, that's it.
[Guest]: And I think all my thought process is in that frame.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: So yeah,
[Guest]: so on this independent media thing,
[Guest]: that's why I think the wire piece that I wrote.
[Guest]: So let me put it this way,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: I donate to the wire.
[Guest]: I don't know to the caravan.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: I have a subscription,
[Guest]: but I don't read either,
[Guest]: because I think they need to exist.
[Guest]: And I support them because they are among the few who are fighting the good fight.
[Guest]: So, you know,
[Guest]: you,
[Guest]: so I'm making this distinction that I'm critical,
[Guest]: but I'm not saying that
[Guest]: they
[Guest]: don't need to exist.
[Guest]: You know,
[Guest]: some people make a comparison between OpIndia and wire.
[Amit Varma]: I think that's a ludicrous comparison.
[Guest]: That's ridiculous.
[Guest]: That's ludicrous.
[Guest]: Like you're saying,
[Guest]: Oh no,
[Guest]: but so they'll tell me,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: you said that the wire hasn't done,
[Guest]: this was a wrong article.
[Guest]: I said,
[Guest]: yes,
[Guest]: I'm saying I'm critical of the wire.
[Guest]: I'm critical of the caravan,
[Guest]: but that's such an unfair comparison.
[Guest]: You should say that how unfortunate it is for the,
[Guest]: I mean,
[Guest]: from my vantage point,
[Guest]: for the larger Indian right-wing to not have a publication that they can be proud of,
[Guest]: that,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: that does journalism,
[Guest]: not,
[Guest]: so I'm saying that's a distinction that these,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: these are messy things where,
[Guest]: again,
[Guest]: when you start bucketing,
[Guest]: yeah,
[Guest]: propaganda,
[Guest]: journalism,
[Guest]: right.
[Guest]: I remember again,
[Guest]: despite,
[Guest]: like I left HT,
[Guest]: someone comes and tells me HT is a propaganda.
[Guest]: I was like,
[Guest]: you are an idiot.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: Because you are doing this because you're thinking is lazy.
[Guest]: You don't want to think deep enough.
[Guest]: So you say that the paper has problems.
[Guest]: Don't say it's propaganda.
[Guest]: So I'm saying that is the frame.
[Guest]: Now,
[Guest]: in that,
[Guest]: what has started happening,
[Guest]: I think,
[Guest]: in the independent media,
[Guest]: like this editor once gave me this brilliant statement.
[Guest]: He said,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: Samarth,
[Guest]: we are living in a time when
[Guest]: the BJP will give us certificate of nationalism.
[Guest]: The communist party will give us the certificate of secularism.
[Guest]: And the caravan will give us a certificate for journalism.
[Guest]: And I think,
[Unknown]: again,
[Unknown]: I say,
[Guest]: all of this conversation is from the vantage point of a reporter.
[Guest]: I just want to write stories and I report.
[Guest]: If you go down to the concrete,
[Guest]: again,
[Guest]: concrete,
[Guest]: abstract,
[Guest]: right,
[Guest]: forget like in the abstract,
[Guest]: it's very simple.
[Guest]: I think what has started happening is that
[Guest]: I believe that
[Guest]: journalism should be about truth seeking.
[Guest]: And truth seeking is hard because,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: all sorts of human motivations come in
[Guest]: that take you away from,
[Guest]: not human motivations,
[Guest]: human nature comes in
[Guest]: that takes you away from the path.
[Guest]: It happens with scientists,
[Guest]: happens with journalists,
[Guest]: anyone who says that,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: my only commitment is to the truth.
[Guest]: I don't care about anyone else.
[Guest]: They're probably lying.
[Guest]: I want to believe that.
[Guest]: So, you know,
[Guest]: I am there,
[Guest]: but there could be,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: forces that will take me away from that,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: So let's,
[Guest]: but in principle,
[Guest]: you agree.
[Guest]: Now,
[Guest]: the second thing is what I think has started happening is that
[Guest]: you think that
[Guest]: there is much more than truth seeking
[Guest]: that journalism achieves,
[Guest]: which is a social change.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: Impact,
[Guest]: saving democracy.
[Guest]: Now,
[Guest]: there is no direct correlation between
[Guest]: truth seeking and these ends.
[Guest]: And I think that is the conflict that
[Guest]: we need to address
[Guest]: and understand.
[Guest]: Do you know Jill Lepore?
[Guest]: This American historian.
[Guest]: She loves beautiful stuff in the New Yorker.
[Unknown]: I love her writing.
[Guest]: She,
[Guest]: in one of
[Guest]: our panel discussions,
[Guest]: she made this point.
[Guest]: She said,
[Guest]: that who has said that in a battlefield between truth and lies,
[Guest]: truth will win.
[Guest]: If there's a boxing match,
[Guest]: it's a myth,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: We see the truth will always,
[Guest]: Satyamev Jayate,
[Guest]: truth triumphs.
[Guest]: This is a mythology.
[Guest]: Ask someone who has been let down by the justice system.
[Guest]: Go and tell them in the face that
[Guest]: truth always wins.
[Guest]: Ask Bilqis Bhanu.
[Guest]: Bilqis,
[Guest]: recent event,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So like,
[Guest]: this idea that
[Guest]: truth seeking
[Guest]: will lead to
[Guest]: a better world.
[Guest]: It's a
[Guest]: lovely
[Guest]: idea to have in your head
[Guest]: to comfort yourself.
[Guest]: But,
[Guest]: I don't think that's a neat translation.
[Guest]: So what I feel is happening in the independent media
[Guest]: is that
[Guest]: truth will always win.
[Guest]: So what I feel is happening in the independent media
[Guest]: is that we want to believe we are doing journalism.
[Guest]: So if from my vantage point,
[Guest]: my critique of The Wire came from that point,
[Guest]: that
[Guest]: if you say truth seeking is your job,
[Guest]: you failed at it.
[Guest]: Okay?
[Guest]: You injected something in the public sphere,
[Amit Varma]: and I've written in great detail about my
[Amit Varma]: critique.
[Guest]: I'll link it from the show notes.
[Guest]: Which is like,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: you spent whatever years in this investigation
[Guest]: to put out something that
[Guest]: does not stand any journalistic scrutiny.
[Guest]: It's not journalism.
[Guest]: You have good intentions,
[Guest]: but good intentions don't make for good journalism.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: You can be very courageous,
[Guest]: but courage does not lead to good journalism.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: Good journalism is about process.
[Guest]: And I think that
[Guest]: moral,
[Guest]: not moral,
[Guest]: I think that clarity about
[Guest]: what is it,
[Guest]: like,
[Guest]: what is journalism for
[Guest]: in a time when,
[Guest]: and I,
[Guest]: you can clearly see right there,
[Guest]: in a time when press freedom is clearly under attack,
[Guest]: where,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: people
[Guest]: who speak truth to power,
[Guest]: outs,
[Guest]: not just newsroom,
[Guest]: anyone, right?
[Guest]: There being
[Guest]: all sorts of things are happening,
[Guest]: democratic backsliding,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: we are in that ecosystem.
[Guest]: So,
[Guest]: does that change the role of journalism?
[Guest]: I think,
[Guest]: individual journalists,
[Guest]: perhaps,
[Guest]: and news organizations are struggling with it.
[Guest]: And maybe the answer that they have settled on
[Guest]: is that
[Guest]: there is no
[Guest]: there is more to our work
[Guest]: than just reporting.
[Guest]: Maybe we are part of the change.
[Guest]: And I think once you take that frame,
[Guest]: the way you look at the world changes,
[Guest]: okay?
[Guest]: Maybe that
[Guest]: dilutes
[Guest]: your filter.
[Guest]: Like what makes journalism different from everything else,
[Guest]: fundamentally,
[Guest]: is the editorial layer.
[Guest]: It matters a lot.
[Guest]: Because as a reporter,
[Guest]: I'm always attached to my material.
[Guest]: It's my editor who will come and tell me,
[Guest]: that boss,
[Guest]: you fucked up here.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: Remove this from here.
[Guest]: You brought two sources,
[Guest]: I want four.
[Guest]: Okay?
[Guest]: This thing is not adding up.
[Guest]: That's what
[Guest]: good editors do.
[Guest]: It's not that they are
[Guest]: copy editing your story.
[Guest]: They help you get to
[Guest]: what do we call?
[Guest]: Journalistic standards.
[Guest]: You meet the journalistic standards,
[Guest]: publishable, right?
[Guest]: Maybe in this
[Guest]: framing about
[Guest]: our
[Guest]: reconception of what our role is,
[Guest]: at least the way I think
[Guest]: journalistic standards should be,
[Guest]: I just feel some of
[Guest]: and I can name the wire and the caravan,
[Guest]: they have diluted this.
[Guest]: And Amit,
[Guest]: this is such,
[Guest]: I have observed,
[Guest]: I have these private conversations with my friends.
[Guest]: There is, I can tell you,
[Guest]: a lot of discomfort
[Guest]: among
[Guest]: liberal-leaning journalists
[Guest]: about
[Guest]: what is happening.
[Guest]: But you can't,
[Guest]: you
[Guest]: struggle to say it in public because
[Guest]: you feel that will
[Guest]: me saying this,
[Guest]: will that de-legitimize
[Guest]: the work
[Guest]: that these guys are doing?
[Guest]: Because,
[Guest]: and that's a tricky bit because
[Guest]: in today's time,
[Guest]: anyone who wants to discredit the media,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: They just want one thing.
[Guest]: And they will come after you to
[Guest]: not to,
[Guest]: they don't want to attack a story.
[Guest]: They want to de-legitimize institutions so that
[Guest]: you become irrelevant.
[Guest]: So which is why there is,
[Guest]: I feel at least
[Guest]: in my private conversations,
[Guest]: that
[Guest]: there is a conflict where on one hand you see,
[Guest]: ya kuch toh problem hain haan pe,
[Guest]: you know?
[Guest]: But,
[Guest]: we don't know how to battle with it.
[Guest]: And then you go and talk to your readers.
[Guest]: There's this friend of mine,
[Guest]: I think she's 32, 33,
[Guest]: once I was having,
[Guest]: and very, you know,
[Guest]: passionate about the media,
[Guest]: I want to think.
[Guest]: So she once,
[Guest]: we were on a video call and she tells me,
[Guest]: someone has,
[Guest]: I think, you know, as I'm aging,
[Guest]: I'm moving towards the right.
[Guest]: You know?
[Guest]: I said, why?
[Guest]: She said, because, you know, now I read
[Guest]: The Wire
[Guest]: and I'm not able to relate.
[Guest]: You know, so I think, you know,
[Guest]: but The Wire is a great institution,
[Guest]: so maybe my values have changed.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: And then I asked her that,
[Guest]: please don't think like that.
[Guest]: Because she was like, no.
[Guest]: She took the responsibility on her
[Guest]: because she said,
[Guest]: I cannot relate anymore.
[Guest]: This is becoming too much for me.
[Guest]: So I stopped.
[Guest]: So,
[Guest]: I am saying that there is a shift happening,
[Guest]: at least from my vantage point.
[Guest]: I don't,
[Guest]: there's no easy answer,
[Guest]: but I'm saying,
[Guest]: if we don't acknowledge
[Guest]: that,
[Guest]: from the perspective of truth seeking,
[Guest]: our idea that
[Guest]: democracy needs to be saved,
[Guest]: and there's some, you know,
[Guest]: bigger problems happening in this country,
[Guest]: and journalists need to stand up for it,
[Guest]: and how that skews incentives,
[Guest]: then we are deluding ourselves
[Guest]: if we don't acknowledge this.
[Guest]: And, you know, we talk about pressures,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: that there's a pressure from the government
[Guest]: because it's a government ad or business.
[Guest]: I mean, there's also a subscriber pressure, no?
[Guest]: If you have built an audience
[Guest]: which wants you to speak
[Guest]: critical about the government,
[Guest]: then that is a pressure that you also have
[Guest]: because you will get,
[Guest]: and this is,
[Guest]: and this is, I'm not just saying it theoretically,
[Guest]: I think it was Andrew Potter,
[Guest]: he was the editor of a Canadian newspaper,
[Guest]: he has written about in his blog
[Guest]: that how,
[Guest]: you know, sometimes,
[Guest]: let's say there's a story that someone covers,
[Guest]: and instead of the lead story,
[Guest]: they put it down.
[Guest]: You know, it's not the lead story,
[Guest]: it's the third story.
[Guest]: People become angry
[Guest]: because you feel,
[Guest]: no, this should be the lead story.
[Guest]: Why is it inside?
[Guest]: Why is it not amplified?
[Guest]: Not that information is being censored.
[Guest]: It's that you feel,
[Guest]: this is Potter's words,
[Guest]: that,
[Guest]: the institution I love,
[Guest]: they have let me down.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: And when you're a subscriber,
[Guest]: you have these expectations
[Guest]: that you subscribe
[Guest]: because in a way,
[Guest]: it reinforces your identity
[Guest]: as a political citizen,
[Guest]: standing up for something.
[Guest]: You don't buy a newspaper
[Guest]: because you want to read.
[Guest]: I don't know,
[Guest]: oh, I want to know the truth,
[Guest]: so I want to read the paper.
[Guest]: There are other reasons why people subscribe.
[Guest]: Or, you know,
[Guest]: our loyalties,
[Guest]: you know, so I'm saying this whole idea
[Guest]: that, you know,
[Guest]: if readers will pay,
[Guest]: it's independent.
[Guest]: So you need to question, right?
[Guest]: Like, what is independence?
[Guest]: You will always have the pressure
[Guest]: of what your subscriber wants.
[Guest]: So it works all the way.
[Guest]: So again, there's no neat distinction,
[Guest]: just because you're independent
[Guest]: in the sense you're not mainstream,
[Guest]: that your incentives are totally aligned.
[Guest]: And that's where I think
[Guest]: my primary critique comes in.
[Guest]: And I don't actually see this
[Guest]: going in the right direction
[Guest]: from my vantage point,
[Guest]: but still, yeah,
[Guest]: I think they need to exist
[Guest]: and I'll continue to support them.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and I just want to give a message
[Amit Varma]: to your 32-year-old friend
[Amit Varma]: who told you that she was aging.
[Unknown]: Listen, shut up, okay?
[Unknown]: You're not aging.
[Amit Varma]: It's okay.
[Amit Varma]: You know, the best years of your life
[Amit Varma]: are ahead of you.
[Amit Varma]: Just enjoy.
[Amit Varma]: And also, I don't think
[Amit Varma]: one should think in,
[Amit Varma]: like, that whole frame of left and right
[Guest]: exasperates me.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: You know, my frame is freedom
[Amit Varma]: versus non-freedom.
[Amit Varma]: And everybody's against freedom in India.
[Amit Varma]: So what can we do?
[Amit Varma]: We can't do anything.
[Amit Varma]: And the other part of what you said
[Amit Varma]: that resonated with me
[Amit Varma]: was when you said that
[Amit Varma]: you have liberal friends
[Amit Varma]: who agree with you,
[Amit Varma]: but don't want to speak up
[Unknown]: because solidarity for the cause.
[Amit Varma]: And similarly, I remember
[Amit Varma]: two or three years back,
[Amit Varma]: I had a trans friend
[Amit Varma]: who told me that she was
[Amit Varma]: deeply uncomfortable
[Amit Varma]: about JK Rowling being hounded
[Amit Varma]: over what she said.
[Amit Varma]: And her point was that, listen,
[Amit Varma]: that debate on whether
[Amit Varma]: biological sex is real or not
[Amit Varma]: has nothing to do with
[Amit Varma]: how trans people are treated.
[Amit Varma]: Those are separate issues.
[Amit Varma]: But she wouldn't say that in public.
[Amit Varma]: And she said that, no, in public,
[Amit Varma]: I have to kind of show solidarity
[Amit Varma]: with the cause, the same kind of thing,
[Amit Varma]: not in so many words.
[Amit Varma]: And I feel that there is
[Amit Varma]: also a danger in this
[Amit Varma]: kind of tribal thinking.
[Amit Varma]: It is.
[Amit Varma]: That this is my tribe, good or bad,
[Amit Varma]: kuch bhi ho jaye,
[Amit Varma]: I'm going to stand by my tribe.
[Amit Varma]: And I understand that at one level,
[Amit Varma]: you, of course, don't want to be mobbed
[Amit Varma]: or cancelled by your own people,
[Amit Varma]: which can happen so much.
[Amit Varma]: But it's a danger to watch out for,
[Amit Varma]: because I think there are
[Amit Varma]: many, many, many people,
[Amit Varma]: perhaps even a silent majority,
[Amit Varma]: which is not part of any tribe.
[Amit Varma]: And you lose credibility
[Amit Varma]: when you do this, you know?
[Amit Varma]: So on the one hand, of course,
[Amit Varma]: the wire is journalism,
[Amit Varma]: even if there are flaws
[Amit Varma]: and OpIndia is propaganda.
[Amit Varma]: There's none.
[Amit Varma]: There's no journalism there.
[Amit Varma]: I don't think they even pretend.
[Unknown]: They don't even pretend.
[Unknown]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: But in the eyes of a lot of people,
[Amit Varma]: these are competing narrative battles.
[Amit Varma]: And you, and this is, you know,
[Amit Varma]: one reason I really respect AltNews
[Amit Varma]: and Pratik Sinha and Mohammed Zubair,
[Amit Varma]: because they don't only fact check the right.
[Guest]: They fact check everybody.
[Guest]: They do it rigorously.
[Amit Varma]: Yes.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, just rigor is visible.
[Guest]: Visible.
[Guest]: You can see it and know what they're doing.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: How they do it.
[Guest]: As you know, equal opportunity offender.
[Unknown]: As you know, one editor used to say,
[Guest]: you see their work.
[Guest]: The work speaks for itself.
[Amit Varma]: Absolutely.
[Amit Varma]: Now let's address a larger question
[Amit Varma]: about Indian journalism,
[Amit Varma]: where everything we have said
[Amit Varma]: at one level seems pessimistic, right?
[Amit Varma]: But then you have this lovely quote
[Amit Varma]: by Raj Kamal Jha in one of the pieces
[Amit Varma]: you wrote, where you quote him as saying,
[Amit Varma]: quote, quote,
[Amit Varma]: good journalism is not dying.
[Amit Varma]: It is getting better and bigger.
[Amit Varma]: It's just bad.
[Amit Varma]: Journalism makes a lot more noise
[Amit Varma]: than it used to do five years ago.
[Amit Varma]: Absolutely.
[Amit Varma]: And you've elaborated on that.
[Amit Varma]: And it's a fantastic argument.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know,
[Amit Varma]: in a piece where you also talk about
[Amit Varma]: is Indian media thriving or decaying
[Amit Varma]: and you give the standard reasons
[Amit Varma]: for why we would say it is decaying.
[Amit Varma]: But then you say that, no, you know,
[Amit Varma]: actually it is thriving also.
[Amit Varma]: You can make that argument.
[Guest]: So make it for us.
[Guest]: The thriving argument.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So, I mean, the piece is there.
[Guest]: So I hope people will read it.
[Guest]: I'll give you a story.
[Guest]: Again, you know,
[Guest]: I love your abstract and concrete framework.
[Guest]: Great.
[Guest]: OK, and I don't think the story is here.
[Guest]: So when I was reporting on COVID,
[Guest]: I spoke to a journalist in Odisha.
[Guest]: OK, he's a senior guy.
[Guest]: He used to cover a district.
[Guest]: And I was trying to do something
[Guest]: with COVID deaths.
[Guest]: The project didn't go anywhere.
[Guest]: But I spoke to him and for information.
[Guest]: I was and now this person
[Guest]: who in that district was going
[Guest]: and from inside the government, he had sources.
[Guest]: He was getting out the death figures
[Guest]: that the government was hiding.
[Guest]: And every day he would publish
[Guest]: on his Facebook page.
[Guest]: And he had a WhatsApp kind of a newsletter,
[Guest]: which and just focus on one district.
[Guest]: OK, and he would send it to everyone.
[Guest]: So on a day to day basis,
[Guest]: the district administration was confused.
[Guest]: No one will know who this person is.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: They will not like, you know,
[Guest]: when we say courageous journalist
[Guest]: on Twitter, you know,
[Guest]: his name will not be there.
[Guest]: But this person is doing journalism
[Guest]: in a Odisha district,
[Guest]: which local people
[Guest]: and the administration both care about.
[Guest]: I didn't dream up of.
[Guest]: There's a person I was talking to.
[Guest]: Because they know the district better.
[Guest]: So I called him.
[Guest]: So he explained how to get information.
[Guest]: Then he went further.
[Guest]: He said, you know,
[Guest]: I have a WhatsApp newsletter.
[Guest]: I send it.
[Guest]: He says, you know,
[Guest]: I'm going around and I see a problem.
[Guest]: That, you know,
[Guest]: some project is stuck.
[Guest]: He says, take my photo.
[Guest]: I first send it to the officials.
[Guest]: I send it to the district office.
[Guest]: Look, this is it, I'm doing a story.
[Guest]: So what they do sometimes
[Guest]: is they tell him to wait,
[Guest]: we are actually fixing it.
[Guest]: Give me two days, don't inform me now.
[Guest]: So he stops.
[Guest]: OK, because he says,
[Guest]: you know, I just want to solve the problem.
[Guest]: And he says, if they do it in two days,
[Guest]: then I'll do the story.
[Guest]: They solved this problem.
[Guest]: If they don't,
[Guest]: then I tell them that the administration didn't.
[Guest]: This problem is happening here.
[Guest]: They are not doing anything.
[Guest]: He says, I go.
[Guest]: I say, which files are stuck?
[Guest]: Then I see sometimes,
[Guest]: OK, these files are stuck.
[Guest]: I talk to the state office.
[Guest]: So if I find out that a problem
[Guest]: that was a district problem,
[Guest]: the files are stuck in it.
[Guest]: So I'll send it and broadcast it.
[Guest]: And then, you know,
[Guest]: the government moves.
[Guest]: Amit, when I heard that story,
[Guest]: I was so inspired
[Guest]: because we have this notion
[Guest]: that everything in this country
[Guest]: has to be about one man.
[Guest]: Mr. Modi.
[Guest]: No.
[Guest]: Isn't this journalism?
[Amit Varma]: Fantastic journalism.
[Guest]: Fantastic journalism.
[Guest]: And that's what I'm saying that,
[Guest]: you know, there are,
[Guest]: if you start going beyond
[Guest]: this world of Twitter,
[Guest]: you know, beyond this
[Guest]: English language journalism
[Guest]: and you start seeing,
[Guest]: OK, what are people doing?
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: What he is doing.
[Guest]: And this, I think, I mean,
[Guest]: I don't have a lot of answers,
[Guest]: but I think one of the things
[Guest]: you can imagine about the future
[Guest]: is that accountability
[Guest]: will be decentralized.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: That you don't need
[Guest]: a Hindustan Times
[Guest]: to go and talk about
[Guest]: every district and government.
[Guest]: Ultimately, it's about,
[Guest]: you know, the state and the citizens
[Guest]: in a way, if you think
[Guest]: about political journalism.
[Guest]: But the state is not just the center.
[Guest]: It's happening at all these layers.
[Guest]: So I'm saying that is one example
[Guest]: where you gives me hope
[Guest]: that, you know, people are thinking,
[Guest]: doing stuff outside the limelight.
[Guest]: Then I told you this example.
[Guest]: I have seen firsthand
[Guest]: examples inside newsrooms,
[Guest]: the kind of battles people fight
[Guest]: to get a story in the paper.
[Guest]: When you see that,
[Guest]: when you talk to your colleagues,
[Guest]: it gives me a lot of hope
[Guest]: that despite living
[Guest]: in those moral conundrums.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: They are sticking around
[Guest]: to make to make sure
[Guest]: critical things go.
[Guest]: And I'm not saying that critical
[Guest]: thing is the whole point
[Guest]: of journalism, but I'm saying
[Guest]: that that's an important part.
[Guest]: People stick around.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: And the piece that I wrote,
[Guest]: this is example, I said,
[Guest]: look at just Denning Bhaskar.
[Guest]: Then this was Denning Bhaskar, right?
[Guest]: The paper that covered
[Guest]: the COVID deaths.
[Guest]: I'm forgetting if that was someone
[Guest]: you look at it.
[Guest]: I mean, in general,
[Guest]: you would not imagine
[Guest]: that paper to be so critical
[Guest]: of the government.
[Guest]: But you know, when there is
[Guest]: was no scope for propaganda
[Guest]: in the sense that
[Guest]: it's hard to lie
[Guest]: that there is no tragedy.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: How do you cover it up?
[Guest]: At that time,
[Guest]: this paper sent
[Guest]: 30 reporters across Ganges
[Guest]: to just go and see.
[Guest]: And they click their photographs.
[Guest]: You told the story.
[Guest]: And, you know,
[Guest]: when you get that story
[Guest]: in a big paper,
[Guest]: it makes an impact
[Guest]: because it makes people think
[Guest]: that what is happening
[Guest]: to gap about death count.
[Guest]: That's a story that
[Guest]: the dead bodies in the river
[Guest]: unaccounted for, right?
[Guest]: So the paper did it, right?
[Guest]: What happens after that?
[Guest]: So I wrote this piece
[Guest]: for this journalism conference.
[Guest]: They asked me,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: the day I filed the piece,
[Guest]: a week after that,
[Guest]: there were reads in Bhaskar's office,
[Guest]: raid in Bhaskar's office, right?
[Guest]: Again, to a signal.
[Guest]: Now it's a pattern, right?
[Guest]: So what you see is that,
[Guest]: you know, when people say
[Guest]: journalists are sold out,
[Guest]: they're not sold out, right?
[Guest]: There are problems,
[Guest]: but I'm saying that
[Guest]: time and again, time and again,
[Guest]: you see someone somewhere
[Guest]: pushing the bar
[Guest]: to make sure that
[Guest]: the information goes out.
[Guest]: Amit, I know from private experience,
[Guest]: journalists having access to information,
[Guest]: which for some reason
[Guest]: their newsroom is not publishing.
[Guest]: They just give their story
[Guest]: to someone else
[Guest]: where it can be published.
[Guest]: And I don't think it's a new thing.
[Guest]: It has been,
[Guest]: I think I remember Shikhar Gupta
[Guest]: talking something about
[Guest]: something at the Indian Express
[Guest]: and the Hindu,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: it may like they were competitors,
[Guest]: but they also change information
[Guest]: back in the day.
[Guest]: So, but these things
[Guest]: are not visible outside.
[Guest]: So I'm saying
[Guest]: this is what gives me hope
[Guest]: that on a day-to-day basis,
[Guest]: you see these efforts.
[Guest]: So at a systemic level,
[Guest]: while everything kind of seems broken,
[Guest]: when you start connecting these dots,
[Guest]: I mean,
[Guest]: that's what gives me hope.
[Guest]: And one thing I really want to plug here
[Guest]: is that forget just newsrooms,
[Guest]: the civil society, right?
[Guest]: And they also contribute a lot
[Guest]: in journalism.
[Guest]: I'll give you an example
[Guest]: that was personal to me.
[Guest]: So in my newsletter,
[Guest]: which I started,
[Guest]: I wrote that polling story
[Amit Varma]: on forecasting
[Guest]: where I created this index
[Guest]: to rank forecasters.
[Guest]: One of those forecasters
[Guest]: sent me a legal notice
[Guest]: because they were,
[Guest]: they didn't look good in my ranking.
[Guest]: So it's a defamation notice.
[Guest]: And I mean,
[Guest]: I am running this newsletter
[Guest]: as a one person.
[Guest]: There's no institution.
[Guest]: So the day I got a notice
[Guest]: on my email,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: it was 7.30 PM in the evening.
[Guest]: I was writing some code
[Guest]: or something else.
[Guest]: And I didn't know what to do.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: Like you have this legal notice
[Guest]: reply in 48 hours.
[Guest]: I spoke to a couple of journalist friends
[Guest]: and they said, you know,
[Guest]: why don't you message Apar Gupta
[Guest]: from Internet Freedom Foundation?
[Guest]: And I was looking
[Guest]: and I had spoken to Apar
[Guest]: a couple of times as a reporter.
[Guest]: I text him that was,
[Guest]: he instantly called me.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: And he said,
[Guest]: don't worry, we will help you.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: And do you like,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: that day I felt
[Guest]: that evening
[Guest]: that
[Guest]: these bullies,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: They can bully,
[Guest]: but I have a support system,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: Which comes from organizations
[Guest]: like the Internet Freedom Foundation.
[Guest]: And then I asked,
[Guest]: okay, what is it?
[Guest]: Told me they have a thing
[Guest]: called Digital Patrakar Clinic.
[Unknown]: Do you know about it?
[Unknown]: No.
[Guest]: So what they have done
[Guest]: to support independent journalists
[Guest]: who can't afford,
[Guest]: who don't have,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: newsrooms have lawyers.
[Guest]: Someone doing
[Guest]: reporting in a newsletter
[Guest]: does not have a lawyer.
[Guest]: So they help people like us.
[Guest]: So that if someone tries to
[Guest]: bully us,
[Guest]: they help you end to end.
[Guest]: So he told me
[Guest]: that first of all,
[Guest]: don't worry.
[Guest]: This 48 hour thing is bullshit.
[Guest]: We will help you file a response.
[Guest]: If it goes to court,
[Guest]: we will help you
[Guest]: with the court proceedings.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: And everything is pro bono.
[Guest]: So don't worry.
[Guest]: We'll help.
[Guest]: I slept
[Guest]: that night.
[Guest]: I had a comfortable sleep
[Guest]: because I know that,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: there are people
[Guest]: who will support you.
[Guest]: And they did.
[Guest]: They filed the response.
[Guest]: Their lawyers spoke to me
[Guest]: and nothing like
[Guest]: they didn't ask for anything.
[Guest]: And I,
[Guest]: like I was off Twitter
[Guest]: at the time, etc.
[Guest]: So I haven't even
[Guest]: publicly written about it.
[Guest]: So they don't even get
[Guest]: like credit in any way.
[Guest]: Like, and like, who cares?
[Guest]: Like, it's just,
[Guest]: they just help one reporter.
[Guest]: But you know how it helps?
[Guest]: It gives me confidence
[Guest]: that yes,
[Guest]: tomorrow if I do a story,
[Guest]: which I want to tell
[Guest]: and someone gets offended,
[Guest]: there are people out there
[Guest]: who will come and stand with you.
[Guest]: People like, you know,
[Unknown]: Apargupta and his team.
[Unknown]: Isn't that brilliant?
[Guest]: That you have this support system.
[Guest]: So this gives me hope
[Guest]: that,
[Guest]: yes, there is a problem.
[Guest]: But again, this is not a,
[Guest]: that's why I say,
[Guest]: it's not a,
[Guest]: in my head,
[Guest]: fight of one journalist
[Guest]: or one organization.
[Guest]: Point is the powerful people
[Guest]: want to control
[Guest]: want to control the flow of information.
[Guest]: That is the problem
[Guest]: at a macro level.
[Guest]: And as someone who believes in freedom,
[Guest]: not a particular political party or be
[Guest]: just freedom of speech,
[Guest]: freedom of the press.
[Guest]: It's a fight that
[Guest]: people who are not in power
[Guest]: have to collectively fight
[Guest]: to make sure that those
[Guest]: information flows are broken.
[Guest]: Like,
[Guest]: information should not be suppressed.
[Guest]: Amplification is,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: so that's,
[Guest]: if you take all of that in consideration,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: I don't like on a day-to-day basis,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: I care about the press.
[Guest]: I worry about it,
[Guest]: but I'm very hopeful.
[Guest]: And you talk to young reporters,
[Guest]: you know, they are like,
[Guest]: they're doing good work.
[Guest]: You see, I mean,
[Guest]: on a day-to-day basis,
[Guest]: don't you see great stories being broken
[Guest]: on an everyday basis?
[Guest]: You know, someone,
[Guest]: there are stories I won't read
[Guest]: because I'm not interested,
[Guest]: but across the board,
[Guest]: so much good journalism is happening.
[Guest]: How do you ignore it?
[Guest]: So you say,
[Guest]: Godi media is here,
[Guest]: all the journalists are here,
[Guest]: and then you see all of that.
[Guest]: So I think that's my long answer
[Guest]: to what makes me very hopeful
[Guest]: about future of Indian journalism,
[Guest]: that despite all the problems,
[Guest]: if people are sticking around,
[Guest]: that really inspires me.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I love reading your essay on this.
[Amit Varma]: And what was also a great point
[Amit Varma]: you made in that
[Amit Varma]: was how we need to think of
[Amit Varma]: information production as a collective.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly.
[Amit Varma]: The point that you basically made in short
[Amit Varma]: is that,
[Amit Varma]: you know,
[Amit Varma]: thought experiment,
[Amit Varma]: that all journalism ceases to exist tomorrow.
[Amit Varma]: The void in our lives will be incredible.
[Amit Varma]: We won't know what the hell is going on.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Amit Varma]: You know,
[Amit Varma]: it is like a fish swimming in water,
[Amit Varma]: and suddenly all the water is gone,
[Amit Varma]: and you're like gasping
[Amit Varma]: and like, what the fuck happened?
[Amit Varma]: And it's exactly like that.
[Unknown]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And the thing is,
[Amit Varma]: we bemoan,
[Amit Varma]: that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: 99% news is coming,
[Amit Varma]: but why isn't that 1% coming?
[Amit Varma]: But sometimes,
[Amit Varma]: as you've pointed out in the real world,
[Amit Varma]: to get that 99% out,
[Amit Varma]: some people choose to compromise on the 1%,
[Guest]: and sometimes that 1% will come.
[Guest]: Someone else will do that.
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: It will come from somewhere else.
[Amit Varma]: Civil society is there.
[Amit Varma]: That gives me great hope also,
[Amit Varma]: that civil society is there.
[Amit Varma]: Like, I believe in people.
[Amit Varma]: The reason I believe in economic freedom
[Amit Varma]: is markets are one mechanism
[Amit Varma]: for people to express themselves,
[Amit Varma]: but there are other ways.
[Unknown]: And, you know,
[Amit Varma]: technology is empowering individuals,
[Amit Varma]: and there will always be voices,
[Amit Varma]: there will always be dissent.
[Guest]: You can't shut everything down.
[Guest]: You can't shut anything.
[Guest]: In fact, you know,
[Guest]: thank you for,
[Guest]: I forgot almost this point,
[Guest]: but you know this.
[Guest]: So, you know,
[Guest]: sometimes when I,
[Guest]: I have a lot of times wonder that,
[Guest]: this truth seeking,
[Guest]: this journalism, does it matter?
[Guest]: So, my answer to that is,
[Guest]: if you don't get the answer,
[Guest]: you know, it's a math problem.
[Guest]: Go for the counterfactual.
[Guest]: There's nothing.
[Guest]: Then what happens?
[Guest]: Then you realize,
[Guest]: you know, this we want.
[Guest]: I think anyone who says that
[Guest]: mainstream media has a problem,
[Guest]: I ask them this question,
[Guest]: if we shut everything down,
[Guest]: will things be better?
[Guest]: No.
[Guest]: So, on that note,
[Guest]: there's this book I just want to recommend.
[Guest]: Heard of this book,
[Unknown]: Martin Guri, Revolt of the Public?
[Unknown]: Yeah, yeah, of course, yeah.
[Guest]: So, the frame, one like,
[Guest]: it's a,
[Guest]: that book is filled with arguments,
[Guest]: but one thing that really struck me,
[Guest]: he said that,
[Guest]: the relationship between
[Guest]: power and information
[Guest]: is not linear.
[Guest]: You know, you say,
[Guest]: these online bloggers are dissenters
[Guest]: and they will curb.
[Guest]: He says, no.
[Guest]: The powerful just want to control TV.
[Guest]: No.
[Guest]: He says that this is,
[Guest]: you don't know how
[Guest]: these two things intersect.
[Guest]: What is exactly the relationship
[Guest]: between information flow and power?
[Guest]: What we know is that
[Guest]: the powerful want to control.
[Guest]: What they're not realizing
[Guest]: is that you can control a TV channel.
[Guest]: You can control a newspaper.
[Guest]: You can put a blogger,
[Guest]: a Mohammed Zubair in jail.
[Guest]: You can't shut down
[Guest]: the information sphere.
[Guest]: Because we are at a time when,
[Guest]: you know, that's a revolt of the public
[Guest]: where he says that
[Guest]: there was a time
[Guest]: when everything was authority.
[Guest]: So, a newspaper
[Guest]: was in the game of authority.
[Guest]: That, you know, it was,
[Guest]: you close this newspaper,
[Guest]: information flow is controlled.
[Guest]: Now, we are out of that game.
[Guest]: So, I think they,
[Guest]: people in power,
[Guest]: they also don't know
[Guest]: that how much can you control?
[Guest]: How much?
[Guest]: So, you do your, you know,
[Guest]: you flood the information sphere with shit
[Guest]: so that people are confused.
[Guest]: So, that's a strategy.
[Guest]: But I don't think in today's time,
[Guest]: if you want to do a story,
[Guest]: truth or reporting,
[Guest]: you can't stop it being published.
[Guest]: That, I think, is something,
[Guest]: a gift that technology has given us.
[Guest]: And people are exploiting it
[Guest]: all across the board.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know,
[Amit Varma]: we've spoken for almost five hours
[Amit Varma]: and we haven't mentioned
[Amit Varma]: data journalism yet,
[Amit Varma]: which is, of course,
[Amit Varma]: a pigeonholing term
[Amit Varma]: that slightly irritates me.
[Amit Varma]: Like, even when I, you know,
[Amit Varma]: recorded with Rukmini, for example,
[Amit Varma]: or, you know, Pramit,
[Amit Varma]: I felt kind of guilty.
[Amit Varma]: I said, I don't want to use this term
[Amit Varma]: because these guys are just
[Amit Varma]: proper journalists as are you.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, data is one tool
[Amit Varma]: that you have among many
[Amit Varma]: to tell a story.
[Amit Varma]: So, tell me a little bit about
[Amit Varma]: how you,
[Amit Varma]: what is wrong with the way
[Amit Varma]: people think of data journalism
[Amit Varma]: and what are the appropriate ways
[Amit Varma]: to think of data,
[Amit Varma]: both for journalists and for readers?
[Amit Varma]: Because when the term was new,
[Amit Varma]: we used to watch Hans Rosling's
[Amit Varma]: graphics, you know,
[Amit Varma]: and for us, in our heads,
[Amit Varma]: data journalism was all these
[Amit Varma]: funky moving graphics and, you know,
[Amit Varma]: but that's not it.
[Amit Varma]: That's just one way of
[Amit Varma]: packaging it, as it were.
[Amit Varma]: But there's a lot more to that.
[Amit Varma]: So, tell me a little bit about this.
[Amit Varma]: I feel you have a lot of harassment
[Amit Varma]: that you're happy to let out.
[Guest]: So, first of all, I think
[Guest]: Rukmini and Pramit are both,
[Guest]: in a way, friends and mentors.
[Guest]: Like, you know, Rukmini hired me
[Amit Varma]: in journalism.
[Guest]: Oh, okay. I didn't know that.
[Guest]: She was my first boss.
[Guest]: Yeah. And Pramit,
[Guest]: when I was at Hindustan Times,
[Guest]: he was at Mint.
[Guest]: So we, you know,
[Guest]: yeah, we used to have these,
[Amit Varma]: you know, Friday evening chats.
[Unknown]: And he was also active in campus politics.
[Unknown]: Yeah.
[Unknown]: So, I mean,
[Amit Varma]: they are very unusual people.
[Amit Varma]: Rukmini used to sing in a rock band.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, they were not
[Amit Varma]: standard geeky people.
[Guest]: Something was going on.
[Guest]: Yeah, it's just I heard these episodes
[Guest]: and it was very fascinating,
[Guest]: you know, to hear.
[Guest]: So, I mean, you have had the
[Guest]: pros of the profession
[Guest]: on your podcast.
[Guest]: I mean, I learned from them.
[Guest]: But still, I'll just tell you what.
[Guest]: So, I think,
[Guest]: when I came,
[Guest]: when I got my first job
[Guest]: as a data journalist,
[Guest]: I used to probably tell that,
[Guest]: you know, I use data to tell stories.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: But then you realize that
[Guest]: what a limited
[Guest]: way to think about a story.
[Guest]: Why?
[Guest]: I think the frustrating part
[Guest]: is not just graphics or whatever.
[Guest]: It's just that
[Guest]: you want to answer a question.
[Guest]: You want to tell a story.
[Guest]: And data is a very powerful way
[Guest]: to answer a question.
[Guest]: It's a scientific question.
[Guest]: It could be a day-to-day question.
[Guest]: It could be a fitness question.
[Guest]: Right. It just,
[Guest]: we were talking about
[Guest]: glucose monitors the other day.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: I'm saying it's a one way,
[Guest]: but it's not the only way.
[Guest]: So, I now think that
[Guest]: you do journalism
[Guest]: where you try to answer a question.
[Guest]: And there are so many different ways
[Guest]: you can interview people,
[Guest]: you can find documents,
[Guest]: and you can also do data.
[Guest]: So, when you isolate
[Guest]: and say, I do data journalism.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: It's just meaningless.
[Guest]: You do journalism,
[Guest]: like all journalism should be data-backed
[Guest]: when it can be.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: When and there will be situations
[Guest]: and there are like tons of questions
[Guest]: where you don't have
[Guest]: data-centric answers.
[Guest]: So, you use your other toolkit.
[Guest]: So, my short answer is this,
[Guest]: that the framing is fundamentally
[Guest]: bizarre because,
[Guest]: like,
[Guest]: are we making a distinction that
[Guest]: some things are data journalism,
[Guest]: the other journalism doesn't need data
[Guest]: or evidence.
[Guest]: No.
[Guest]: Data is a good way to get evidence.
[Guest]: So, that I think,
[Guest]: and it hit me very early in my,
[Guest]: like, in my career.
[Guest]: So, I, you know,
[Guest]: I don't even like to interview people.
[Guest]: I, you know, I don't even like to introduce myself as a...
[Guest]: So, if you see my profiles,
[Guest]: I just say reporter.
[Guest]: No data reporter,
[Guest]: no data journalist,
[Guest]: nothing.
[Guest]: But it remains central to my work
[Guest]: and how I think.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: I think data should be
[Amit Varma]: sort of central to all our worlds,
[Amit Varma]: into, you know,
[Amit Varma]: whether we're journalists or not,
[Amit Varma]: just in terms of understanding the world,
[Amit Varma]: understanding ourselves.
[Amit Varma]: So, there are a ton of,
[Amit Varma]: you know, journalism
[Amit Varma]: and stats-related questions.
[Amit Varma]: I still have noted down here,
[Amit Varma]: which I was planning to ask you,
[Amit Varma]: but I think we've sat here for a long time.
[Amit Varma]: So, I'll sort of link all your posts
[Amit Varma]: from the show notes
[Amit Varma]: and let people get to them.
[Amit Varma]: I want to, you know,
[Amit Varma]: go back to the personal domain.
[Amit Varma]: And when we had our first conversation in Udaipur,
[Amit Varma]: we were,
[Amit Varma]: I was telling you about
[Amit Varma]: how my CGM,
[Amit Varma]: continuous glucose monitor,
[Amit Varma]: kind of changed my life.
[Amit Varma]: And the long and the short story of it is that
[Amit Varma]: I have come to realize
[Amit Varma]: that people like us,
[Amit Varma]: journalists,
[Amit Varma]: intellectuals,
[Amit Varma]: whatever,
[Amit Varma]: people like us,
[Amit Varma]: are trying to understand the world.
[Amit Varma]: We are proud of the efforts we make
[Amit Varma]: in trying to understand the world,
[Amit Varma]: understand processes,
[Amit Varma]: understand systems,
[Amit Varma]: all of that.
[Amit Varma]: But we don't adequately
[Amit Varma]: understand our own bodies.
[Amit Varma]: And my realization of this
[Amit Varma]: came recently
[Amit Varma]: when my good friend Ajay Shah
[Amit Varma]: recommended that I use
[Amit Varma]: a continuous glucose monitor
[Amit Varma]: to see what is happening in my own body.
[Amit Varma]: And I got that.
[Amit Varma]: And the result shook me so much
[Amit Varma]: that I changed my entire lifestyle
[Amit Varma]: to great benefit, right?
[Amit Varma]: And I realized that this,
[Amit Varma]: you know,
[Amit Varma]: what we earlier spoke about
[Unknown]: the examined life
[Unknown]: and unexamined life
[Amit Varma]: is not worth living.
[Amit Varma]: And I think a key part of that
[Amit Varma]: is understanding our own bodies.
[Amit Varma]: And over the next few months,
[Amit Varma]: I intend to make more efforts
[Amit Varma]: to kind of figure this out,
[Amit Varma]: because I think I have been
[Amit Varma]: incredibly sloppy
[Amit Varma]: when it comes to health
[Amit Varma]: and my own body
[Amit Varma]: and understanding that.
[Amit Varma]: And I think those are key to happiness
[Amit Varma]: and in producing
[Amit Varma]: the best version of myself.
[Amit Varma]: And I noticed that
[Amit Varma]: this is something that
[Amit Varma]: you have also worked on
[Unknown]: intensively over the last few years
[Unknown]: in terms of how you have thought
[Amit Varma]: about fitness,
[Amit Varma]: how you've thought about
[Amit Varma]: pretty much every aspect of your life.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit more about this,
[Amit Varma]: because I feel there's a lot for me
[Amit Varma]: and my listeners
[Amit Varma]: to learn from your journey.
[Guest]: Just specifically about
[Guest]: fitness and the role of
[Guest]: combining with
[Guest]: knowing about your body
[Guest]: and data in that way.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, like I'm not asking you
[Amit Varma]: for prescriptive advice.
[Amit Varma]: But just yeah,
[Amit Varma]: what was your journey like?
[Amit Varma]: What was your thinking?
[Amit Varma]: What did you discover?
[Unknown]: And you know,
[Amit Varma]: how did you build the habits
[Amit Varma]: that you built around fitness?
[Guest]: All of that.
[Guest]: OK, sure.
[Guest]: So I mean, now it's
[Guest]: such an integral part of my life
[Guest]: that I last week,
[Guest]: we launched a food
[Guest]: and fitness newsletter.
[Unknown]: Wow.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Guest]: Yeah, it's called Truths We Told
[Guest]: doing with this friend
[Guest]: who has a food startup
[Guest]: and we just built.
[Guest]: So yeah, yesterday we had,
[Guest]: I mean, what is the date today?
[Guest]: Whatever.
[Guest]: We put out our first story
[Guest]: about defining what health even means,
[Guest]: because if you don't know
[Guest]: what it means,
[Guest]: like how do you even improve it?
[Guest]: That was the point of the
[Guest]: so we are doing long reads,
[Guest]: you know, long,
[Guest]: in-depth narratives
[Guest]: around food and fitness.
[Guest]: So I'm just trying to say that,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: we had this giant discussion
[Guest]: about journalism,
[Guest]: but for me,
[Guest]: you know, it doesn't matter.
[Guest]: It's a political story
[Guest]: or, you know,
[Guest]: otherwise you say,
[Guest]: oh, fitness is lifestyle.
[Guest]: No, was fitness matters.
[Guest]: And I want to use the same rigor
[Guest]: that I use in
[Guest]: my political investigations
[Guest]: to fitness journalism.
[Guest]: So that's what I'm doing.
[Guest]: And all of this came through
[Guest]: because I think this is
[Guest]: in during COVID,
[Guest]: again,
[Guest]: random things happen,
[Guest]: et cetera, et cetera.
[Guest]: And I got into this whole
[Guest]: like fitness journey.
[Guest]: And so I grew up
[Guest]: as a overweight
[Guest]: adolescent teenage, right?
[Guest]: And all through my early adulthood,
[Guest]: that was the case.
[Guest]: And I think like many people,
[Guest]: you feel that,
[Guest]: you know, you need to lose weight,
[Guest]: you want to exercise,
[Guest]: but nothing happens.
[Guest]: You know, at least for me,
[Guest]: you try to do something
[Guest]: and then it falls apart
[Guest]: and you don't know
[Guest]: what is happening.
[Guest]: You consult someone
[Guest]: and it's just so bizarre.
[Guest]: It's just so confusing.
[Guest]: And you start feeling
[Guest]: that there's no point.
[Guest]: Forget it.
[Guest]: Let it be.
[Guest]: What happened, Amit,
[Guest]: in 2020,
[Guest]: there was a month,
[Guest]: like I'm a nerd.
[Guest]: So I just read
[Guest]: fitness literature in and out,
[Guest]: whatever I could.
[Guest]: And weirdly,
[Guest]: I, for me,
[Guest]: just felt like
[Guest]: this is actually
[Guest]: just a math problem,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: that I just have to monitor.
[Guest]: I have to build good habits.
[Guest]: I have to watch my food intake.
[Guest]: I need to eat better
[Guest]: and I need to exercise.
[Guest]: So I'm not going into details
[Guest]: of what I did,
[Guest]: but I'm saying the thinking.
[Guest]: And then,
[Guest]: conceptually,
[Guest]: I understood
[Guest]: that what it,
[Guest]: like what fitness means
[Guest]: and how I can approach
[Guest]: in a structured way
[Guest]: where I know
[Guest]: doing X can lead to Y.
[Guest]: And I saw that impact
[Guest]: in a month.
[Guest]: Then, you know,
[Guest]: there is a bulb that
[Guest]: lit in my head
[Guest]: that, okay,
[Guest]: this is it, man.
[Guest]: It's not that difficult.
[Guest]: And the good thing was
[Guest]: that I was at home.
[Guest]: It was locked down.
[Guest]: So you don't have to go out.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: All you need to be
[Guest]: was super disciplined.
[Guest]: This is how I want to eat.
[Guest]: I need to do this exercise
[Guest]: and just stick to it.
[Guest]: And then I set this.
[Guest]: So it took me,
[Guest]: it was a seven month time
[Guest]: where I lost 20 kilos.
[Amit Varma]: Fantastic.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: The point is not
[Guest]: that I lost this weight.
[Guest]: The point is that
[Guest]: in the seven months,
[Guest]: I completely changed
[Guest]: my relationship
[Guest]: with food and exercise.
[Guest]: Because sometimes
[Guest]: people ask me,
[Guest]: I said, I can't give you
[Guest]: a two minute answer.
[Guest]: The point is,
[Guest]: I've worked hard
[Guest]: on building habits.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: That, for example,
[Guest]: I realized that
[Guest]: workouts.
[Guest]: And now, Amit,
[Guest]: I just love exercise.
[Guest]: You know, this endorphin rush
[Guest]: that I get,
[Guest]: I just wanted,
[Guest]: like I just got COVID
[Guest]: and like I'm in the rest phase.
[Guest]: So I can't,
[Guest]: but I'm like looking forward to,
[Guest]: you know, earlier
[Guest]: it used to be a core that,
[Guest]: oh my God,
[Guest]: I have to go to the gym.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: Now it's something
[Guest]: I look forward to
[Guest]: because I saw
[Guest]: what it does to my body.
[Guest]: But I also realize
[Guest]: that life happens.
[Guest]: So if I,
[Guest]: there's a great framework
[Guest]: from Sendhil Mullaiyanathan,
[Guest]: he's an economist
[Guest]: whom I really like.
[Guest]: He said that
[Guest]: going to the gym every day
[Guest]: is easier than
[Guest]: going to the gym
[Guest]: three days a week,
[Guest]: because it removes
[Guest]: the most problematic part
[Guest]: in this whole,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: being consistent,
[Guest]: which is choice.
[Guest]: Which day do you want to go?
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So you do it every day.
[Guest]: You do it for 10 minutes
[Guest]: if you can't do it for an hour,
[Guest]: but do it.
[Guest]: And I was like,
[Guest]: this makes sense.
[Guest]: So let's do it every day.
[Guest]: Then it was that,
[Guest]: what happened?
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: That do it first thing in the morning
[Guest]: because you know,
[Guest]: I'm thinking
[Guest]: I'll do it at 6.30 in the evening,
[Guest]: I'll get a phone call.
[Guest]: My mood will swing.
[Guest]: I just want to watch a movie.
[Guest]: I just want to go for a walk.
[Guest]: You know,
[Guest]: and I can't,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: lift weights
[Guest]: or can't do exercise.
[Guest]: So do it first thing in the morning,
[Guest]: get over it.
[Guest]: Again, it's intentionality,
[Guest]: right,
[Guest]: where it all began, that you decide that this matters to me.
[Guest]: And then what started happening
[Guest]: once I got into the zone,
[Guest]: when I changed my eating habits
[Guest]: and I learned to cook,
[Guest]: I think that was one of the best things I did,
[Guest]: that I started going into the kitchen
[Guest]: and understanding ingredients
[Guest]: and understanding,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: what is going inside my food.
[Guest]: I started understanding packaged food.
[Guest]: I read labels.
[Guest]: I understood the science of all of it.
[Guest]: And then, you know,
[Guest]: this picture emerges that actually,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: the world makes food fitness so complicated,
[Guest]: but it isn't.
[Guest]: It's just a few,
[Guest]: five or six first principles.
[Guest]: If you just follow it,
[Guest]: you'll be great.
[Guest]: And on a day-to-day basis,
[Guest]: when you feel so alive,
[Guest]: because your energy levels are,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: great,
[Guest]: you feel good.
[Guest]: If you,
[Guest]: if you're not,
[Guest]: if I'm anxious
[Guest]: and I go for a run
[Guest]: and I emerge out of it,
[Guest]: anxiety free.
[Guest]: So I'm saying,
[Guest]: it's you experience it
[Guest]: and you realize that,
[Guest]: oh my God,
[Guest]: it's a gift,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: This is,
[Guest]: like,
[Guest]: if you want to live a good life,
[Guest]: it is not something like,
[Guest]: at least now I don't see it as something,
[Guest]: as an option.
[Guest]: It's something that
[Guest]: I really enjoy.
[Guest]: And I think it didn't,
[Guest]: I would never say that,
[Guest]: ek din mujhe,
[Guest]: maine socha aur,
[Guest]: ye ho gaya.
[Guest]: You know,
[Guest]: it is something that I experienced
[Guest]: and in that experience,
[Guest]: habits started building up
[Guest]: and then it stuck.
[Guest]: So,
[Guest]: again,
[Guest]: there's no advice here.
[Guest]: I'm just saying this is what
[Guest]: my journey was.
[Guest]: And now I,
[Guest]: anyone who is interested,
[Guest]: my friends,
[Guest]: I just try to help them
[Guest]: to say that boss,
[Guest]: it's not complicated.
[Guest]: And,
[Guest]: but I have to point out one thing,
[Guest]: which I'm like,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: we hear about fat shaming,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: So interestingly,
[Guest]: I was never fat shamed.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: But I'm fit shamed.
[Guest]: Have you heard of this term?
[Amit Varma]: My God.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Guest]: Fit shamed.
[Guest]: You know what?
[Guest]: It's like,
[Guest]: somehow,
[Guest]: I don't know.
[Guest]: I think,
[Guest]: you go and like,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: when I told you,
[Guest]: you come to Delhi and
[Guest]: people start commenting on your body
[Guest]: that,
[Guest]: oh my God,
[Guest]: you're losing weight.
[Guest]: Your body has changed.
[Guest]: What are you doing?
[Guest]: Why don't you eat?
[Guest]: Or like,
[Guest]: oh,
[Guest]: you go to the gym
[Guest]: and you know,
[Guest]: that snarky expression about
[Guest]: going to the gym.
[Guest]: I'm like,
[Guest]: boss,
[Guest]: like,
[Guest]: what the hell, man?
[Guest]: Like,
[Guest]: like,
[Amit Varma]: you know what I'm trying to say.
[Amit Varma]: I mean,
[Amit Varma]: there's a certain kind of mindset
[Amit Varma]: which says,
[Amit Varma]: oh,
[Amit Varma]: if you're going to the gym,
[Amit Varma]: it's for vanity
[Amit Varma]: and you want to patao
[Amit Varma]: and you want sculpted thing
[Guest]: and all of that nonsense.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So I'm saying that
[Guest]: that's real
[Guest]: because
[Guest]: you see those attitudes
[Guest]: that,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: but then I think I read somewhere
[Guest]: that,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: a lot of times people are projecting
[Guest]: their own anxieties on you.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: And so it's fine,
[Guest]: but I'm saying this happens.
[Unknown]: Yeah.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: It's and,
[Guest]: but then you look at,
[Guest]: I,
[Guest]: when I read biographies
[Guest]: so many people,
[Guest]: I really admire.
[Guest]: I don't know the fitness routine,
[Guest]: like in my,
[Guest]: one of the blogs I wrote on fitness,
[Guest]: like Barack Obama.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: When he was like the president of the US,
[Guest]: he used to spend one hour in the gym,
[Guest]: four days a week,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: with Michelle
[Guest]: and his chef
[Guest]: and his trainer.
[Guest]: And he described in his lovely memoir,
[Guest]: he describes this,
[Guest]: that, you know,
[Guest]: and I was like,
[Guest]: yeah,
[Guest]: this guy
[Guest]: is at that point was one of the most powerful
[Guest]: man in the world.
[Guest]: And he's taking time out to work out in the gym.
[Guest]: So what excuse do I have?
[Guest]: You know,
[Guest]: Math reporter who,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: you see all across.
[Guest]: And, you know,
[Guest]: I think when you get into private discussions
[Guest]: with people,
[Guest]: they tell you,
[Guest]: we are doing this,
[Guest]: we are doing that.
[Guest]: So then I think your whole point of the silent majority
[Guest]: that you keep me.
[Guest]: So I'm like,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: deep down,
[Guest]: everyone knows this matters.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: One of the things I started at one point felt uncomfortable
[Guest]: about was talking about it in public,
[Guest]: because again,
[Guest]: these things,
[Guest]: but now,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: I make sure that
[Guest]: like I do,
[Guest]: because I think this needs to be made more normalized.
[Guest]: It's not that,
[Guest]: oh,
[Guest]: fitness is for,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: these actors
[Guest]: and people who won't know.
[Guest]: Because one day,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: friend asked me,
[Guest]: if you have to choose between your body and your mind,
[Guest]: what would you choose?
[Guest]: I was like,
[Guest]: idiot,
[Guest]: this is such a terrible question.
[Guest]: These things are connected.
[Guest]: And I see,
[Guest]: because when my body,
[Guest]: like my body supports,
[Guest]: how I think,
[Guest]: how I work on a day to day basis.
[Guest]: So that way I'm saying that it changed my life.
[Guest]: It became such a central fulcrum of everything that I do.
[Guest]: And yeah,
[Guest]: I think everyone should really think about it.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And I think there is this flawed impression
[Amit Varma]: that if you shift to a healthier lifestyle,
[Amit Varma]: that there is some pain involved,
[Amit Varma]: that it is not enjoyable.
[Amit Varma]: And that's absolute nonsense.
[Amit Varma]: Like I went through this really nice phase three years back
[Amit Varma]: till I lost discipline
[Amit Varma]: and I came out of it
[Amit Varma]: and COVID made me sedentary and lose my habits.
[Amit Varma]: But I was,
[Amit Varma]: I lost 20 kgs in a similar period of time as you did.
[Amit Varma]: I was on keto plus intermittent fasting
[Amit Varma]: and I loved that food.
[Amit Varma]: I was running every day.
[Amit Varma]: And I remember that initially,
[Amit Varma]: it was difficult to discipline myself,
[Amit Varma]: 5.30 in the morning,
[Amit Varma]: you're going to run.
[Amit Varma]: But then I read a quote,
[Amit Varma]: which was so,
[Amit Varma]: so true.
[Amit Varma]: And this quote was all about that.
[Amit Varma]: Every time you feel like not going out to run,
[Amit Varma]: just remind yourself that once you go out,
[Unknown]: you will never regret having run after you come back.
[Amit Varma]: And I have found that to be true.
[Amit Varma]: Every single time I have done exercise of any kind,
[Unknown]: every single time that I've never regretted it,
[Amit Varma]: you know?
[Amit Varma]: And so once you get into the habit,
[Amit Varma]: once you sort of own it,
[Amit Varma]: you know,
[Amit Varma]: it becomes easy.
[Amit Varma]: Like I often tell my writing students
[Amit Varma]: that if you want to read the dangerous way
[Amit Varma]: to become a better reader is to say that,
[Amit Varma]: okay, to set yourself a goal to do something
[Amit Varma]: that every evening I'll read between six and seven.
[Amit Varma]: And you might do it for two, three days,
[Amit Varma]: but you fall off the wagon and vicious circle sets in.
[Amit Varma]: It affects your self-image.
[Amit Varma]: And then you say,
[Amit Varma]: I'm a Netflix kind of person.
[Amit Varma]: But if you take the approach of saying that,
[Amit Varma]: if you think of the best version of yourself
[Amit Varma]: and you tell yourself that I'm a reader,
[Amit Varma]: you know, when I'm bored,
[Amit Varma]: I reach for a book.
[Amit Varma]: I don't reach for my smartphone.
[Amit Varma]: If you internalize that self-image,
[Amit Varma]: the habit comes from there.
[Amit Varma]: And I feel that the same can work with fitness.
[Amit Varma]: That if you just internalize that self-image,
[Amit Varma]: you know,
[Amit Varma]: it can come from there
[Amit Varma]: and there is no punishment involved.
[Amit Varma]: The exercise is not punishment.
[Amit Varma]: The food is not punishment.
[Amit Varma]: You know, that's my sort of great discovery.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm sort of hitting myself over the head,
[Amit Varma]: keep, you know, all my life.
[Guest]: Manic unique, you live a healthy lifestyle.
[Guest]: That is the thing, right?
[Guest]: People always want to know the perfect thing.
[Amit Varma]: There's no perfect thing.
[Unknown]: It's like, what works for you?
[Unknown]: Yeah.
[Unknown]: You don't have to figure out,
[Guest]: oh, the perfect workout.
[Guest]: Okay, what is Alia Bhatt doing?
[Guest]: No, you just figure out,
[Guest]: because all of us have complicated lives.
[Guest]: Things happen.
[Guest]: Sometimes we'll fall off the track.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: You know, I very consciously also do emotional eating.
[Guest]: Because once I realize what is emotional eating,
[Guest]: when I'm stressed, I want to eat.
[Guest]: So now I have a framework that when I'm stressed,
[Guest]: I know, you know, Samarth, you are stressed
[Guest]: and you are going to emotionally eat.
[Guest]: You know, it's just my voice telling me,
[Guest]: okay, go eat jalebi today.
[Guest]: Okay, I go have a jalebi, right?
[Guest]: And I'm like, I feel good
[Guest]: because I'm not going to beat myself
[Guest]: for having a gulab jamun and a jalebi when I want to.
[Guest]: You know, it's not some purist stand
[Guest]: that I've taken good food, bad food.
[Guest]: That's a very unhealthy distinction to make.
[Guest]: So I think you take, you build habits,
[Guest]: you build your attitude.
[Guest]: And then also realize that, you know, we are humans.
[Guest]: We fall apart and you try.
[Guest]: But I think that what you said, right?
[Guest]: That internalizing, that identity,
[Guest]: that this matters to me more than anything else.
[Guest]: That I think just does wonders.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and I have to keep suppressing
[Amit Varma]: the half Bengali in myself.
[Amit Varma]: You know, the other day I said,
[Amit Varma]: ki chalo push-ups karte hain
[Amit Varma]: and I laid down on the ground to do push-ups.
[Amit Varma]: But then once I'm flat on the ground,
[Amit Varma]: the Bengali half of me is saying ki,
[Amit Varma]: boss, this is a perfect position.
[Amit Varma]: Abhi kahe utna hain?
[Amit Varma]: You know, achhi jaga bhe toh hain.
[Amit Varma]: Ye toh perfect hain na, ye hi toh,
[Amit Varma]: isi liye toh sab kuch karte hain.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, my penultimate question,
[Amit Varma]: though I wish we had another five hours,
[Amit Varma]: but my penultimate question is that
[Amit Varma]: one of the things I really,
[Amit Varma]: that interested me about all the reading up
[Amit Varma]: I was doing of your newsletter and so on,
[Amit Varma]: and even what you spoke earlier,
[Amit Varma]: was a desire to learn more.
[Amit Varma]: You took a sabbatical at one point
[Amit Varma]: where you said ki main chhe maine baad kya,
[Amit Varma]: aat maine baad kya, I just want to learn.
[Amit Varma]: You know, you've written a great piece
[Amit Varma]: on acquiring new skills in the gig economy,
[Amit Varma]: which I think is a great way to think about oneself
[Amit Varma]: as a constantly evolving person with multitudes
[Amit Varma]: rather than a person trained in a thing, right?
[Amit Varma]: And I love that.
[Amit Varma]: And equally, you said when you were in IIT,
[Amit Varma]: aap Coursera mein gaye the, Udemy mein gaye the,
[Amit Varma]: you were always doing courses
[Amit Varma]: and not just in your specific subject,
[Amit Varma]: lekin Humanities ye woh.
[Amit Varma]: What is your attitude towards learning
[Amit Varma]: and how central is it to you?
[Amit Varma]: Because I think, to me, the key quality,
[Amit Varma]: and I think this is, again,
[Amit Varma]: something that you don't need any inborn talent in.
[Unknown]: I think all of us can learn to learn.
[Amit Varma]: And I think if we do that, then we are future proof.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about your experiences with this
[Amit Varma]: in terms of, is it something
[Amit Varma]: that's a regular part of your life
[Amit Varma]: that you're always trying to learn something?
[Amit Varma]: And what advice would you give others
[Amit Varma]: that should they learn things for instrumental reasons?
[Amit Varma]: Ki yeh karke humein yeh skill milega,
[Amit Varma]: iski yeh employability yeh hai.
[Amit Varma]: Or is it okay to just sit down and learn something
[Amit Varma]: because you want to learn it
[Amit Varma]: and then maybe nothing comes out of it?
[Guest]: So I take the second approach.
[Guest]: And see, again, I don't know,
[Guest]: you said how important is learning.
[Guest]: I think learning is everything.
[Guest]: Like I told, I do journalism
[Guest]: because I want to understand the world,
[Guest]: and it just gives me...
[Guest]: I've tried to ask why I don't have an answer.
[Guest]: Uska answer nahi hai ki kyun.
[Guest]: All I know is this is what I want to do.
[Guest]: Like as we are talking, I am studying biology.
[Guest]: Last year, it was for statistics.
[Guest]: This year, I am doing rigorous courses
[Guest]: on fundamentals of biology
[Guest]: because I'm like,
[Guest]: if I don't understand the fundamentals of biology,
[Guest]: how will I make sense of CRISPR?
[Guest]: I just don't want to read someone.
[Guest]: I want to go back first principles biology
[Guest]: so that I can think about it.
[Guest]: And then I'm doing neuroscience,
[Guest]: which is something that has been in my head,
[Guest]: but I want to rigorously study it from the ground up.
[Guest]: Ab I don't have a story, like as a journalist,
[Guest]: I don't have a story that I want to report.
[Guest]: It's just that in my framework,
[Guest]: this is something I feel is important for my growth
[Guest]: as a person who just wants to figure out things.
[Guest]: And I think once that hits in,
[Guest]: ki you know, this will enhance my understanding.
[Guest]: For me, that in most cases gives me the push to start it.
[Guest]: Ab iss se again, I don't...
[Guest]: Actually, you know, now we started the discussion
[Guest]: with my mom, right?
[Guest]: So let's end with that also.
[Guest]: My mom told me back when I was in school,
[Guest]: she said that, you know,
[Guest]: kuch bhi tum padhoge na, kuch kharab nahi jaata hai.
[Guest]: So don't think too much about
[Guest]: ki agar yeh extra cheez karli, toh iss se hoga kya?
[Guest]: Don't ask that question.
[Guest]: If you're learning, just learn.
[Guest]: Something will happen.
[Guest]: And that I think is kind of brilliant
[Guest]: ki aapko sochna nahi padhega yeh main kyu karun.
[Guest]: And Amit, then what happens over the period of time,
[Guest]: you keep doing this and you see your,
[Guest]: you know, you mentioned this point, right?
[Guest]: About high definition picture as dots connect.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, yeah.
[Amit Varma]: That is what happens.
[Guest]: Like, I'll give you a practical example,
[Guest]: which you'll see how organically things happen.
[Guest]: So I live in the hills.
[Guest]: And you know, what is the biggest problem in my life?
[Guest]: You'll see how privileged this dude is.
[Guest]: My biggest problem in my life are monkeys.
[Guest]: Okay?
[Guest]: Because they are in my veranda all the time.
[Guest]: And you know, they're creating a mess.
[Guest]: Okay?
[Guest]: And I have to always be active, how to...
[Guest]: One day I was thinking that,
[Guest]: why can't I recognize who are the good guys
[Guest]: and who are the bad guys?
[Guest]: You know, who creates the struckers?
[Guest]: Because I can't like make any distinction
[Guest]: between these monkeys.
[Guest]: Maybe I knew.
[Guest]: Interestingly, just a week after
[Guest]: I had this question in my head,
[Guest]: I was doing this neuroscience course,
[Guest]: which is the question,
[Guest]: the theme of that course is
[Guest]: how the brain gives rise to the mind.
[Guest]: Okay?
[Guest]: It's a beautiful question.
[Guest]: Then Nancy Kanwisher, who's the instructor,
[Guest]: these all, by the way, this course is on YouTube.
[Guest]: Her introductory lecture has 10 million views, just FYI.
[Guest]: It's, she's such a brilliant teacher.
[Guest]: So she was describing about how humans recognize faces.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: And there she said about this thing called,
[Guest]: I'm forgetting the exact term,
[Guest]: but the other race effect.
[Guest]: You know, sometimes you say now when we make,
[Guest]: I mean, this is politically incorrect,
[Guest]: when we say something about people in China,
[Guest]: that all of them look the same
[Guest]: and that we say it's a racist comment,
[Guest]: but she explained that there is biology to it.
[Guest]: That, you know, how our brain is structured
[Guest]: to recognize faces in the communities we go to,
[Guest]: we grow up, the features that we see, right?
[Guest]: That becomes our model,
[Guest]: which is why when we see someone from another race,
[Guest]: we are not able to make those distinctions.
[Guest]: So as she described studies, it just hit me.
[Guest]: And then I realized that is exactly what is happening.
[Guest]: Why I can't identify these monkeys.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: It's not that all monkeys look the same.
[Guest]: It's that I can't identify.
[Guest]: So it's a small thing, right?
[Guest]: But it just gave me some deep joy
[Guest]: because something I was thinking about,
[Guest]: I was for my day-to-day life.
[Guest]: And I'm doing this course out of just curiosity
[Guest]: and, you know, things just connect.
[Guest]: So what starts happening, I think,
[Guest]: when you are in that process,
[Guest]: at least for me, that out of the blue,
[Guest]: you know, things start connecting,
[Guest]: the dots join,
[Guest]: your high-definition picture starts emerging.
[Guest]: But I don't start by saying,
[Guest]: I want a high-definition picture of X.
[Guest]: Yeah, you gather dots for the love of it.
[Guest]: You love it.
[Guest]: And I think that is just pure joy.
[Guest]: And I think that's why I told you at the conference also
[Guest]: that, you know, my, again, journaling allows you time travel.
[Guest]: So in my sessions, when I'm writing,
[Guest]: Amit, I've been writing this for four years.
[Guest]: Whenever I'm frustrated about being in a newsroom, whatever,
[Guest]: I just want to understand that
[Guest]: why did I come to this profession?
[Guest]: I didn't, never signed up to save democracy, you know?
[Guest]: I love, you know, there are people who come with that.
[Guest]: I didn't come with that.
[Guest]: I just thought journalism, like which other job pays you
[Guest]: to learn about the world and tell it to other people?
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: That's what journalism is in a way, right?
[Guest]: Good way to put it.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So I was like, this is it.
[Guest]: So when you start saying, yeah, I have an understanding,
[Guest]: then you break off your identity.
[Guest]: Journalism is one way to get it.
[Guest]: But if I have the privilege, if my finances are sorted
[Guest]: and I can take out time to learn about things and do it.
[Guest]: So, yeah, that's my approach.
[Guest]: And it just gives me very deep meaning.
[Amit Varma]: But did you solve the monkey problem?
[Guest]: No.
[Guest]: Monkey problem?
[Guest]: I mean, monkey problem.
[Guest]: Now the biology has told me that I can't distinguish
[Guest]: between the faces.
[Guest]: So I don't know.
[Guest]: By the way, you know, monkeys, can I rant about them for a...
[Guest]: Please, go ahead.
[Guest]: You know, this is my favorite walk where I go every day.
[Guest]: Recently, you know, three weeks ago,
[Guest]: like there was this bunch of 15 monkeys who chased me, Amit.
[Guest]: Because I was alone, I was walking up the hill.
[Amit Varma]: Shit, they chased you.
[Guest]: Yeah, and I sprinted the fastest 200 meter ever in my life.
[Guest]: Because I felt like they're going to kill me.
[Guest]: Because they were growling and they were chasing.
[Guest]: And I don't know why.
[Guest]: I did nothing.
[Guest]: So monkey problem can't be solved.
[Guest]: It is something, you know, when I went to the hills,
[Guest]: I was like, you know, Samarth, humans need to coexist with animals.
[Amit Varma]: This is not your home, you know.
[Amit Varma]: Then the monkeys chase you.
[Guest]: Then the monkeys chase me.
[Guest]: And I'm like, I don't know, man.
[Guest]: I can think about whatever ecology and human relationships,
[Guest]: but I also want to be alive.
[Guest]: So monkeys have really complicated my life in that way.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, perhaps the biggest problem of them all,
[Amit Varma]: certainly the biggest problem of them all,
[Amit Varma]: when at the time you are being chased by monkeys.
[Amit Varma]: I love your mother's advice, by the way, you know,
[Amit Varma]: just read everything, you know.
[Amit Varma]: And that's so nice.
[Amit Varma]: So I'll end this episode by asking you for recommendations
[Amit Varma]: for me and my listeners about books, films, music,
[Amit Varma]: whatever you feel like, any category that you really love
[Amit Varma]: and you want to share with others.
[Amit Varma]: You love it.
[Amit Varma]: You love them so much.
[Guest]: Sure.
[Guest]: So I think the book is a no brainer.
[Guest]: I try to plug it at every possible event.
[Guest]: Is Neil Postman written a book called
[Guest]: Amusing Ourselves to Death.
[Guest]: Have you read it?
[Amit Varma]: I haven't read it, but it's been in my show notes
[Amit Varma]: and I have bought the Kindle version and I've intended to read it.
[Amit Varma]: But it's one of those things, you know, all the books that pile up.
[Guest]: But I think that book, when I read it in a friend of mine at the Hindu,
[Guest]: he recommended because, you know,
[Guest]: I think that was a point when I started asking these questions
[Guest]: about the press and the media and I could not.
[Guest]: So he said, start with this.
[Guest]: And it just changed the way I like it.
[Guest]: For me, that I don't think anyone has read it,
[Guest]: but it's a beautiful book.
[Guest]: And I think all of us who at some point are struggling to understand social media,
[Guest]: because that's absurdity of modern life, right?
[Guest]: What is happening?
[Guest]: This book was written in 1985 when there was no internet.
[Guest]: It like the thing was TV and you read it.
[Guest]: The book has stood the test of time.
[Guest]: So I think that book is brilliant.
[Guest]: The second book I will say is, again, I love, you know, old books,
[Guest]: which Future Shock, Elvin Toffler, brilliant book.
[Guest]: You read it and you say, I think 1970 that was published.
[Guest]: I'm recalling from memory sometime around that.
[Guest]: And like what deep thinker, what deep thinking about the future
[Guest]: and how you think about it.
[Guest]: The books is about that how in modern society,
[Guest]: the pace of change has exponentially increased.
[Guest]: And as humans, we're not designed to cope with that change.
[Guest]: So what do we do?
[Guest]: So he talks about all sorts of, you know,
[Guest]: from where we live to our human relationships, all of those things,
[Guest]: and talks about how we will adopt in the future.
[Guest]: And I think it's such a, I think the genre is a futurist,
[Guest]: but it almost feels like sociological work, right?
[Guest]: It's so deep.
[Guest]: It gives you so many ideas about thinking about the future.
[Guest]: So I think that's the second book that I strongly recommend.
[Guest]: So I'll stop at, I mean, books, you know,
[Guest]: are never ending recommendations, but these two.
[Guest]: Movies, I'll tell you one of my favorite movies is a new one.
[Guest]: You've seen the trial of Chicago seven.
[Guest]: No, it's a beautiful film.
[Guest]: You know, that's a, yeah, I just love the movie
[Guest]: because it's a very political movie,
[Guest]: but it really had a deep impact on me.
[Guest]: So I encourage people to watch it.
[Guest]: And of course, Dead Poets Society, which we have already mentioned.
[Guest]: So yeah, I think I'll stop here.
[Amit Varma]: Samad, thank you so much for, you know,
[Amit Varma]: spending so much time with me today.
[Amit Varma]: I think we've actually, I mean,
[Amit Varma]: I think the recording will be something over five hours,
[Amit Varma]: but we've been in the studio together for six hours, 40 minutes already.
[Amit Varma]: So thank you so much.
[Guest]: Thank you for having me.
[Guest]: I think it's from being a listener for, I don't know,
[Guest]: you don't know, we have met at the media rumble in Delhi in 2018 or 19.
[Amit Varma]: I'm forgetting.
[Amit Varma]: I'm sorry.
[Amit Varma]: I'm an old man.
[Guest]: I forget these things.
[Guest]: Of course.
[Guest]: I don't even, I'm saying that like I've been a listener for that long.
[Guest]: So it's an, it was an absolute pleasure to have this conversation.
[Guest]: Thank you.
[Unknown]: Thank you.